      Edexcel A Level Business                                                       Your notes


3.5 Assessing Competitiveness
Contents
  Interpretation of Financial Statements
  Ratio Analysis
  Human Resources




                      © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.   Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   1
 Interpretation of Financial Statements
                                                                                               Your notes

Using the statement of comprehensive
income
  The statement of comprehensive income is also known as the profit and loss account
  It shows the income and expenditure of a business over a period of time — usually a year
  — and calculates the amount of profit made (see sub-topic 2.3.1)

Example of a statement of comprehensive income for Head
to Toe Wellbeing Ltd




  The extract from the statement of comprehensive income for Head to Toe Wellbeing
  Ltd shows figures for both 2022 and the previous year, allowing comparison over time

Stakeholder interest in the statement of
comprehensive income
  The profit and loss account is a very useful source of information for stakeholders to
  evaluate the performance of a business
      Shareholders
          Interested in profits earned, business growth and dividend payments
      Employees
          Interested in profits earned and potential for wage increases and job stability



                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   2
      Managers and directors
          Interested in key performance data, such as an improvement in sales revenue                 Your notes
          and net profit
      Suppliers
          Interested in the continued success of the company that they are supplying
          This information is also used by suppliers to determine the level of trade credit
          offered to businesses
      Government
          Used to determine how much tax is payable
      Local community
          Interested in the stability of the business and what this may mean for jobs in the
          community
          Another interest is to see if the firm is generating enough profit to perhaps
          approach them for local sponsorship

Using the statement of financial
position (balance sheet)
  The statement of financial position, sometimes called the balance sheet, contains the
  financial information required to draw conclusions about the liquidity of the business
      Liquidity is the ability of a business to meet its short-term commitments (e.g.
      payments to creditors) with its available assets
      A business that cannot pay its bills will usually fail very quickly, even if it is profitable
      Managing liquidity is a key way to manage risk in a business and helps a business
      prepare for the unexpected
  The statement of financial position shows the financial structure of a business at a
  specific point in time
      It identifies a business's assets and liabilities and specifies the capital (money) used
      to fund the business
      The statement of financial position is also known as the balance sheet

Example of a statement of financial position for Packer
Sports Ltd




                              © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com    3
                                                                                           Your notes




Stakeholder interest in the statement of financial
position
  Stakeholders will use the statement of financial position alongside the statement of
  comprehensive income to perform ratio analysis and compare performance over time
  or with other businesses



                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   4
How stakeholders use the statement of financial position
 Stakeholder                   Interest in the statement of financial position                   Your notes

 Shareholders          Used to identify the asset structure of the business and how their
                       investment has been put to use
                       Used to calculate the working capital of the business and
                       determine its solvency
                       Used to determine the rough value of a business, which helps a
                       judgement on whether their investment is growing

 Managers and          Used to identify the financial position of the business at a given
  directors            point in time
                       Useful to assess the working capital position of the business and
                       determine if there are enough liquid current assets to pay its bills
                       Provides information on the capital structure of the business,
                       which helps guide decisions on whether to raise further funds
                       through borrowing or via other means (e.g. share issue)

 Suppliers and         Used to judge the solvency of the business to determine the risk
   creditors           when offering firms trade credit
                       Businesses with low levels of working capital may find it difficult
                       to pay short-term debts, and so suppliers may offer trade credit,
                       but with stricter terms

  Employees            Is the business financially stable, or are jobs at risk?
                       Has the business's performance improved or worsened?
                       What is the business spending its money on?
                       How much are senior executives paid?
                       How much tax is the business paying?




  Examiner Tips and Tricks
  Information found in the profit and loss account and the balance sheet can be used in
  a range of answers.
  For example, if you are answering a question about sources of finance, you might be
  able to use the capital structure of the business to recommend whether a business
  should borrow or look at an alternative source.




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   5
If a business already relies heavily on borrowing, it may be more sensible to
recommend seeking to raise more share capital.
                                                                                              Your notes




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   6
 Ratio Analysis
                                                                                                Your notes

An introduction to ratio analysis
  Ratio analysis involves extracting information from financial accounts to assess
  business performance and answer key questions, including:
      Why is one business more profitable than another in the same industry?
      Is the business growing?
      How effectively is the business using its assets and capital invested?
      What returns on investment are expected?
      How risky is the financial structure of the business?
Information extracted from the statement of comprehensive income and the statement
                         of financial position for ratio analysis

    Statement of comprehensive income                 Statement of financial position

   Revenue                                            Current assets
   Cost of sales                                      Current liabilities
   Gross profit                                       Inventory (stock)
   Operating profit                                   Trade receivables
   Profit for the year (net profit)                   Trade payables
                                                      Long-term liabilities
                                                      Capital and reserves


  Ratio analysis supports evidence-based decision-making, as it provides measurable
  data that can be used to support judgements and compare performance against
  objectives

The ratio analysis process




                              © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   7
                                                                                                Your notes




The ratio analysis process involves collecting data, calculating ratios, interpreting results
                         and then using results to make decisions


Types of ratios
Gearing ratio
   The gearing ratio shows the long-term financial structure of the business
        It shows the balance of non-current liabilities (e.g. long-term loans) to shareholder
        capital used to fund a business
        The outcome is expressed as a percentage
   The gearing ratio is calculated using the formula

                     Gearing Ratio   = NonCapital
                                            Current Liabilities
                                                  Employed
                                                                x 100

   Capital employed can be calculated by adding non-current liabilities to total equity




   Worked Example
   The table shows an extract from the company accounts of Keals Cosmetics.

    Current Assets                                         £6.2 million

    Current Liabilities                                    £3.4 million

    Non-current Liabilities                                £9.6 million




                              © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   8
   Capital Employed                                        £43.3 million
                                                                                                Your notes
  Calculate the gearing ratio of Keals Cosmetics.
                                                                                       (2)
  Step 1: Identify the data required to calculate the gearing ratio
     Non-current liabilities = £9.6 million
     Capital employed       = £43.3 million
  Step 2: Divide non-current liabilities by the capital employed

                         = £ 43. 3 million ÷ £ 9 . 6 million
                                                                      (1)
                         = 0 . 22
  Step 3: Multiply the outcome by 100, and express the result as a percentage

                                    = 0 . 22 × 100
                                                      (1)
                                    = 22%
      22% of Keals Cosmetics' capital structure is made up of long-term loans

Return on capital employed (RoCE)
  The return on capital employed is also known as the primary ratio
  It compares the profit made by a business to the amount of capital invested in the
  business
  It is a measure of how effectively a business uses the capital invested in the business to
  generate profit
  Return on capital employed is a key performance indicator that can be compared over
  time and also with competitors and with other potential capital investments
  Return on capital employed is expressed as a percentage and can be calculated using
  the formula

                                                Operating Profit
             Return on Capital Employed      = Capital Employed
                                                                 × 100



  Worked Example
  The table shows an extract from the company accounts of Keals Cosmetics.

   Current Liabilities                               £1.5 million

   Revenue                                           £7 million




                              © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   9
   Total Assets                                       £15.4 million

   Operating Profit                                   £2.2 million                                 Your notes

  Calculate Keals Cosmetics' return on capital employed.
                                                                                         (3)
  Step 1: Calculate the capital employed

                               = £ 15 . 4m − £ 1 . 5m
                                                              (1)
                               = £ 13 . 9m
  Step 2: Divide the operating profit by the capital employed

                                       £ 2 . 2m
                                    = £ 13 . 9m
                                                     (1)
                                    = 0 . 16

  Step 3: Multiply the result by 100, and express the outcome as a percentage

                                  = 0 . 16 × 100
                                                        (1)
                                  = 16%
      The capital employed in Keals Cosmetics has generated a return of 16%


Interpreting ratios to make business
decisions
Gearing ratio
  The gearing ratio is used to examine the capital structure of a business
  It compares the amount of capital raised from shareholders with capital raised from
  loans and other forms of long-term borrowing to show the proportion of business
  assets that are financed by long-term borrowing
  In short, it shows how reliant a business is upon borrowed money

Highly geared business
  In a highly geared business, more than 50 per cent of its capital employed are long-
  term loans
      The outcome of the gearing ratio calculation will be greater than 50 per cent
      Substantial levels of interest will need to be paid on this high level of borrowing,
      which means:



                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.           Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   10
          The level of profit available to pay as dividends to shareholders is reduced
          Profit available to retain within the business is limited                                 Your notes
          The business is likely to be considered a risk for further investment
          It is also likely to face difficulties in raising further loan capital
Steps to reduce gearing
  A highly geared business may take steps to lower its ratio by:
      Issuing more ordinary shares to create further share capital
      Retaining more profits to avoid further borrowing
      Repaying loans to lower interest costs for the business

Low geared business
  A low-geared business has less than 50 per cent of its capital employed as long-term
  loans
      The outcome of the gearing ratio calculation will be less than 50 per cent
      The business may be missing out on the opportunity to access finance without the
      need to dilute existing shareholders' control
      This is especially true when interest rates are very low, as has been the case in the
      UK over the last 15 years
      Lenders, such as banks, are more likely to approve loan applications from low-
      geared businesses
      An unwillingness to access loan capital may indicate a risk-averse business, which
      may deter investors

Steps to increase gearing
  A low-geared business may take steps to increase its ratio by:
      Buying back ordinary shares to reduce share capital in relation to borrowing
      Issuing more preference shares with limited loss of control
      Obtaining more loans




 Worked Example
 Catseye Pressings Ltd is considering making an application for a long-term loan to
 purchase a new storage facility.
 The table shows extracts from its balance sheet.

  Non-current Assets                                                 £16.40m



                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.           Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   11
   Current Assets                                                  £3.62m

   Current Liabilities                                             £2.18m                         Your notes

   Non-current Liabilities                                         £5.75m

  Calculate Catseye Pressings Ltd's gearing ratio, and advise whether an application for
  a loan is likely to be approved on this basis.
                                                                                        (5)
  Step 1: Calculate the capital employed

                         = £ 16 . 40 m + £ 3 . 62 m − £ 2 . 18 m
                            (                       )




                                                                      (1)

                         = £ 17 . 84 m
  Step 2: Apply the formula to calculate gearing

                                   = ££175 ..75 m
                                                  x 100
                                             84 m            (1)

                                   = 32 . 23 %
  Step 3: Identify whether the loan application is likely to be approved
      The loan application is likely to be approved (1) as Catseye Pressings Ltd is a low-
      geared business and thus a relatively low risk (1) to lenders.

Interpreting return on capital employed (RoCE)
  RoCE measures how well a business generates profit from the funds invested in the
  business
  The rate differs between industries, so comparison across sectors is not recommended
  However, it can be compared with other forms of return, such as interest rates on
  savings and with other businesses within the same industry
  RoCE can be used to support strategic decisions (e.g. investment or divestment
  decisions) to determine the most profitable option given the level of capital employed
  With RoCE, the higher the rate, the better, as it indicates that the business is profitable
  and using its capital efficiently
      Investors prefer businesses with stable and rising levels of RoCE, as this indicates
      low-risk growth is being achieved
      A ROCE of at least 20 per cent is usually a good sign that the company is in a good
      financial position
  To increase the RoCE level, a business can:
      increase the level of profit generated without introducing new capital into the
      business



                                © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   12
     maintain the level of profit generated whilst reducing the amount of capital in the
     business
                                                                                               Your notes


Worked Example
Faced with increasing costs, Kent & Medway Properties Ltd is looking to close one of
its three high street estate agency branches.
The table below shows some key data for each of the branches.

       Branch                     Capital Employed              Operating Profit

     Sevenoaks                          £2.4m                        £0.37m

     Whitstable                         £3.1m                        £0.57m

     Rochester                          £2.9m                        £0.51m

Calculate the return on capital employed (RoCE) for each branch, and recommend
which branch, on profitability terms, should close.
                                                                                        (5)
Step 1: Apply the formula to calculate the RoCE for each branch

                                           Operating Profit
  Return on Capital Employed            = Capital Employed
                                                            × 100

   Sevenoaks    = ££02. .374mm × 100 = 15 . 42 %
                                                                        (3)
  Whitstable    =      .
                    £ 0 57 m
                                    × 100 = 18 . 39 %
                     £ 3 1m.

   Rochester    = ££02. .519mm × 100 = 17 . 59 %

Step 2: Identify the least profitable branch for closure
    Sevenoaks is the least profitable branch, (1) with a RoCE of 15.42%, (1) and should
    be the branch selected for closure




Examiner Tips and Tricks
When calculating financial ratios, check that you are using the correct units.
In some cases, financial data is presented as raw figures (e.g. £14,520), but in most
cases, you will be working in thousands (£000) or millions (£m).



                               © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.   Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   13
       Ensure that you convert correctly, e.g. £0.39m is equal to £390,000, and £34.9
       (000) is equal to £34,900
       Make sure the decimal is in the correct place                                             Your notes
       Calculate to two decimal places unless stated otherwise


The limitations of ratio analysis
   There are some drawbacks of using ratio analysis, which businesses need to be aware of

Limitations of ratio analysis
     Limitation                                     Explanation

      Making               It is important to compare like for like
    comparisons
                           Over time, the nature of a business can change, affecting the
                           desired level of ratio
                               E.g. A business may diversify into a less competitive
                               industry where higher levels of RoCE may be expected
                           Comparisons between firms are only meaningful where
                           significant similarities exist (e.g. same industry, similar size,
                           comparable products)
                               E.g. a high street jewellery business will have very different
                               working capital needs to those of a fast food outlet, and
                               their profit margins will differ

 Quality of accounts       Accounts may have been legally window dressed
                           (manipulated) to present a particular financial picture.
                           Examples of this include:
                               Bad debts can be written off
                               Property can be revalued
                               Income and costs may be reported during an earlier or
                               later reporting period (e.g. payments to suppliers may be
                               delayed to maximise the level of current assets)
                           Window dressing will have an impact on the quality of ratio
                           analysis calculations




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   14
   Statement of            As a "snapshot" of a business's assets, liabilities and capital at
financial position         a specific point of time, the balance sheet may not be
                                                                                                 Your notes
    limitations            representative of its usual circumstances
                                E.g. a balance sheet may be completed one day before a
                                business sells a large amount of stock or buys a new
                                property, rendering current and non-current assets
                                figures invalid almost immediately

   Qualitative             As ratios only use numerical data from a business's accounts,
  information              key qualitative factors that affect its performance are ignored
                                E.g. the collapse of a competitor may lead to increased
                                sales revenue and profit
                           Increased profit increases the RoCE without any strategic
                           decisions being made


 Despite these limitations, ratio analysis is used by a wide range of internal and external
 analysts to assess the performance of companies
     Venture capitalists and other investors use ratios to support their analysis when
     they consider investing in or lending to businesses
     Banks and insurance providers will use ratios to determine the level of risk a
     business presents and determine the products to which it may be suited
     Investment analysts and journalists make use of ratio analysis to report to clients
     and the media in easy-to-digest terms




Examiner Tips and Tricks
Calculating ratios is straightforward — the real skill is in the interpretation of results
and making recommendations.
If a business is highly geared, further borrowing is likely to be neither attractive nor
possible in most cases. That's quite a simple analytical point.
However, it may be possible to further develop this analysis.
For example, in a time of very low interest rates, maximising borrowing to take
advantage of cheap finance may be preferable to diluting the control of existing
shareholders by issuing further share capital. Now you have an evaluation because
you've considered both sides of the argument.
If you find evidence in the case study that indicates that shareholders would be
unhappy with this dilution of control, then you have a balanced, applied piece of
evaluation.




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   15
 Human Resources
                                                                                               Your notes

An introduction to human resources
  In common with all resources, a business's employees — its human resources — need to
  be managed
  Staff costs can make up a large proportion of a business's costs, so objective
  monitoring of employee performance is a key element of effective financial and
  operational control
  Businesses commonly monitor the following human resources metrics:
      Labour productivity
      Labour turnover
      Labour retention
      Absenteeism

Labour productivity
  Labour productivity is a measure of output per employee
  It is calculated using the formula

                                                 Total Output
              Labour Productivity      = Average number of employees

  Figures used in this formula are for a specific time period (e.g. a week, month or year)
  Businesses aim to increase the level of labour productivity to improve competitiveness

Labour productivity and competitiveness




          Higher labour productivity improves businesses' competitiveness




  Worked Example



                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   16
  Last year, Marinka Homewares made 424,000 lava lamps with a production
  workforce of 350 employees. This year, it forecasts that 480,000 lava lamps will be
  made with a production workforce of 365 employees.                                            Your notes
  Calculate the percentage increase in annual labour productivity per worker between
  last year and this year's forecast.
                                                                                      (4)
  Step 1: Apply the labour productivity formula to calculate the labour productivity
  for both years

                                            ,
                                         424 000
    Labour Productivity last year    =     350
                                                       = 1,211 units per employee
                                                                                    (2)
                                            ,
                                         480 000
    Labour Productivity last year    =     365
                                                       = 1,315 units per employee
  Step 2: Calculate the percentage increase between last year and this year

                            = 1,3151,−2111,211 x 100
                                (                  )




                                                             (2)

                            = 8 . 59 %

Labour turnover and retention
  Labour turnover measures the proportion of employees leaving a business during a
  specific time period
  It is expressed as a percentage and is calculated using the formula

                                      Number of Staff Leaving
               Labour Turnover      = Average Number of Staff
                                                              × 100
  A rising rate of labour turnover can signal internal human resource management
  problems, such as:
      Poor management, leading to workers losing commitment
      A poor recruitment and selection approach, leading to staff leaving soon after
      starting their job
      Low wage levels compared to those that could be earned elsewhere
  External factors can also increase labour turnover in a business
      A buoyant local economy in which workers are attracted to employment
      opportunities elsewhere
      Improved transport links that provide an opportunity for workers to seek work
      across a wider geographical area

Consequences of high labour turnover


                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   17
            Problems                                    Opportunities
                                                                                                 Your notes
   Increased recruitment and              Workers with existing skills can be recruited to
   selection costs                        reduce the need for training
   Increased induction and                New ideas and creativity introduced to the
   training costs                         business
   Lower productivity levels as           New perspective and approaches to problem-
   workers settle into new roles          solving can improve business performance




  Worked Example
  In 2022, Domus Construction Ltd employed an average of 7,200 workers, six per cent
  of whom worked at the head office.
  During 2022, fifty-four head office employees left the business.
  Calculate the labour turnover of Domus Construction's head office in 2022.
                                                                                       (3)
  Step 1: Calculate the number of head office workers

                               = 0 . 06 × 7,200
                                                        (1)
                               = 432 workers
  Step 2: Apply the labour turnover formula

                                  Number of staff leaving
             Labour turnover    = Average number of staff
                                                          × 100

                54                                                         (1)
             = 432 × 100

             = 12 . 5 %
Labour retention
  Labour retention measures the proportion of employees remaining with a business
  during a specific time period
  It is expressed as a percentage and is calculated using the formula

            Labour Retention       = Number  of Staff Remaining
                                      Average Number of Staff
                                                                × 100
  A high level of labour retention means that few staff are leaving the business during a
  given period



                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.          Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   18
                                                                                                  Your notes
 Worked Example
 In 2022, the University of West Surrey employed an average of 4,240 employees, 265
 of whom left the university during the year.
 Calculate the University of West Surrey's staff retention rate in 2022.
                                                                                      (2)
 Step 1: Calculate the number of employees not leaving

                               = 4,240 − 265
                                                         (1)
                               = 3,975
 Step 2: Calculate the retention rate using the formula

                                    Number of Staff Remaining
          Labour Retention     =     Average Number of Staff
                                                                      × 100

            3,975                                                             (1)
          = 4,240 × 100

          = 93 . 75 %

Absenteeism
 The absenteeism rate is a measure of the proportion of staff who were absent from
 work during a specific period of time (e.g. a day, week or month)
 It is expressed as a percentage and is calculated using the formula

                                      Number of staff absent
             Absenteeism rate      = Number of staff employed
                                                              × 100
 High levels of absenteeism can cause several problems for a business, including:
      Absence due to illness requires sick pay to be paid
      Hiring temporary staff to cover for those absent increases costs
      Output is likely to be temporarily reduced if staff are key to the production process
      Other staff may become demotivated if they have to constantly cover for absent
      workers
      A wider culture of absenteeism may develop




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.          Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   19
  Worked Example
  On January 16, twenty-two of Belling Stoneworks Ltd's 189 employees were absent.           Your notes
  Calculate Belling Stoneworks Ltd's absenteeism rate on January 16.
                                                                                     (2)
  Step 1: Substitute the values into the formula

                                      Number of staff absent
            Absenteeism rate    = Number of staff employed × 100

                  22                                                        (2)
           = 189 × 100

           = 11 . 64 %

Human resources strategies to improve
employee performance
  Raising the labour productivity rate, as well as reducing staff turnover and
  absenteeism rates, are key human resource management objectives
      Increased labour productivity will lower the labour cost per unit and contribute to
      improved competitiveness
      More output will be produced, so there is more output to sell — potentially
      increasing revenue
      Money is saved on recruitment, selection and training costs, and a positive group
      spirit may emerge

Strategies to improve employee performance
       Strategy                                      Explanation

  Offering financial           Examples of financial rewards include:
      rewards
                                   Increased pay rates
                                   Profit-sharing schemes
                                   Bonuses and commissions
                                   Performance-related pay
                                   Attendance rewards
                                   Loyalty bonuses
                               Paying workers more or sharing profits may increase
                               commitment and effort, leading to higher output and
                               productivity



                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   20
                           If financial rewards are greater than those of other
                           employers, staff are less likely to want to leave
                                                                                          Your notes
                           Bonuses and commissions are only paid when they have
                           been earned or if targets have been met
                           Attendance and loyalty rewards may improve the intrinsic
                           motivation of workers as they feel valued


 Offering employees        Rewarding senior executives and managers with shares
shares in the company      may increase their commitment to achieving objectives
                           Employees who own shares in the business may work
                           harder and take less time off as they have a financial
                           stake in the success of the business

    Consultation           Consultation involves managers obtaining the views of
                           employees when making decisions
                           Workers are likely to feel more involved within the
                           business and may be less likely to take days off work or
                           leave the business

   Empowerment             Empowerment involves providing employees with
                           autonomy and responsibility to make their own decisions
                           and work on their own behalf
                           Employee are encouraged to make use of their own
                           knowledge and experience and develop their own
                           solutions
                           Workers must be properly trained and equipped with the
                           necessary resources to be properly empowered
                           Leaders need to be prepared to hand over authority and
                           focus on providing encouragement praise and feedback




                        © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   21
