      Edexcel A Level Business                                                      Your notes


2.2 Financial Planning
Contents
  Sales Forecasting
  Sales, Revenue & Costs
  Break-even
  Budgets




                     © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.   Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   1
 Sales Forecasting
                                                                                              Your notes

The purpose of sales forecasts
  Sales forecasts predict future revenues based on past sales figures
  They commonly focus on what will happen in the future to:
      The volume and value of sales
      The size of the market
      Sales as a result of promotional activity
      Sales as a result of cyclical factors
  Sales forecasts are an important tool to support planning and can improve the validity
  of cash flow forecasts
  Businesses use sales forecasts to determine resource requirements in a variety of ways,
  including:
      How many staff will be needed?
      How much stock will be required?
      Does capacity need to be expanded (or reduced)?
      Does the equipment need to be upgraded, replaced or increased (or reduced)?
      How much and what type of finance will be required?
      Is promotional activity (e.g. advertising) required — and when?

Factors affecting sales forecasts
  Developing accurate sales forecasts is a skill that requires an understanding of several
  factors that can influence the reliability of the forecast

Consumer trends
  Seasonal variations
      Demand for certain goods is seasonal
      Events such as major religious festivals, holiday periods and annual events impact
      demand for a wide range of products
            For example, sales of basic homewares increase when students start university
            each September
  Fashion
      Fashion is often led by celebrities, and their influence can have a short-term impact
      on sales




                             © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   2
         For example, when Hollywood legend Megan Fox appeared in September 2021
         at a star-studded event in a Boohoo dress, the company’s sales unexpectedly
         soared by more than 400% during that month                                            Your notes
  Long-term trends
      Consumer behaviour, attitudes and spending habits change over time
          In recent years, environmentally conscious consumers have led many
          businesses to amend sales forecasts to reflect increased demand for green
          products
          For example, in late 2022, vehicle manufacturer Ford increased its sales
          forecasts for electric vehicles by almost 70%
Economic variables
  Economic growth
      During periods of economic growth, increased consumer incomes will lead to
      higher-than-forecast sales
      The opposite will occur during periods of economic slowdown, and sales may be
      lower than forecast
  Inflation
      The general increase in prices over time reduces consumers’ spending power
          Firms may revise their sales forecasts downwards during periods of rising
          inflation
          Firms may revise their sales forecasts upwards during periods of falling inflation
  Unemployment
      Increased levels of unemployment are often experienced during periods of
      recession and tend to be a key cause of reduced spending in the economy
          Sales forecasts for lifestyle and luxury goods may reduce as consumers focus
          their spending on essentials
  Interest rates
      When interest rates rise, borrowing becomes more expensive for consumers
      Businesses that sell products that consumers frequently buy on credit may
      therefore adjust their sales forecasts downwards
          For example, property sales are set to drop to 1.01bn in 2023 from 1.27bn in
          2022, causing many estate agencies to adjust their sales forecasts downwards
  Exchange rates
      When the value of the UK pound sterling falls against other global currencies,
      overseas consumers will find that British exports become relatively cheaper
      Businesses that sell products overseas or that cater to tourists visiting the UK may
      adjust their sales forecasts upwards to reflect the expected increase in demand




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   3
       from a cheaper sterling
           For example, Visit Britain expects the number of tourists entering Britain in 2023    Your notes
           to be 14% higher than in 2022
Actions of competitors
  Sales forecasts should consider the short-term actions of competitors, such as sales
  promotions, as well as longer-term strategies, such as changes to product ranges and
  expansion plans
  Competitor actions are difficult to predict, so the usefulness of past data to predict
  future sales may be limited
       For example, Marks & Spencer announced plans to open 20 new high street stores
       in 2023, partly in response to the closure of several key competitors, including
       Debenhams

Difficulties of sales forecasting
  Sales forecasting usually involves the use of past data to predict the future
  In the short term, sales forecasts are likely to reflect the recent past
  Longer-term sales forecasting is often more problematic, as several factors affect its
  reliability

The main difficulties of sales forecasting




 The difficulties of sales forecasting include interpretation, too much data and the fact
                       that the future does not always mirror the past



                             © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   4
Effective sales forecasting requires skill, time and the accurate use of timely data
    Smaller businesses in particular may lack the experience or specialised personnel           Your notes
    to construct, analyse and interpret sales forecasts
         It is difficult to avoid experience bias (e.g. opinions of the future based on
         experiences in the past)
         Businesses may face problems in constructing sales forecasts that ignore the
         priorities of key stakeholders
The future seldom repeats the occurrences of the past
    Sales forecasts will rarely reflect the full range of external influences that can affect
    future inflows, such as fashions, trends and the actions of competitors
There is a significant amount of data available for businesses to consider when
constructing sales forecasts
    Internal data, such as previous sales figures, will be a key source of information
    when constructing forecasts
    Selecting the most appropriate external data to support sales forecasts is
    extremely challenging and requires careful evaluation




Examiner Tips and Tricks
While sales forecasting as a planning tool has several potential uses for a business,
you should carefully consider how a sales forecast is constructed when evaluating its
usefulness.
    Who is responsible for the sales forecast?
    Which data is used in its construction?
    How reliable or accurate are the data sources underpinning the forecast?
You may even conclude that no sales forecasting is better than a poorly constructed,
biased attempt!




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   5
Sales, Revenue & Costs
                                                                                                Your notes

Calculation of sales volume and sales
revenue
 Sales volume is the number of units sold by a business
     For example, the number of Harry Styles album download purchases
 Sales revenue is the value of the units sold by a business
     For example, the revenue earned by Apple Music from sales of music downloads
     Sales revenue is a key business performance measure and must be calculated to
     identify profit
     Sales revenue is calculated using the formula:

             Sales revenue    = Selling price × Number of units sold
 Sales revenue usually increases as the sales volume increases
 When a firm sells one product, it is easy to calculate the sales revenue
     The more products a firm sells, the harder it is to calculate the sales revenue
     Computer systems make it easier to track sales revenue when multiple products are
     sold by the business




 Worked Example
 Fotherhill Organics Limited sold 39,264 packs of its specialist compost to mail-order
 customers in 2022. The price per pack was £8.75. In addition, it sold 4,280 tonnes to
 gardening businesses for £123.95 per tonne.
 Calculate Fotherhill Organics' sales revenue for 2022.
 Step 1: Calculate the sales revenue from sales to mail-order customers

                            = 39,264 packs × £ 8 . 75
                            = £ 343,560
 Step 2: Calculate the sales revenue from sales to gardening businesses

                           = 4,280 packs × £ 123 . 95
                           = £ 530,506


                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   6
  Step 3: Add together the two sales revenue figures

                               = £ 343,560 + £ 530,506                                              Your notes

                               = £ 874,066
An introduction to costs
     In preparing goods/services for sale, businesses incur a range of costs
     These costs can be broken down into different categories

Fixed costs
     Fixed costs (FC) do not change as the level of output changes
         These have to be paid whether the output is zero or 5,000
             For example, building rent, management salaries, insurance and bank loan
             repayments

Variable costs
     Variable costs (VC) vary directly with the output
         These increase as output increases and vice versa
             For example, raw material costs and wages of workers directly involved in
             production

Total costs
     Total costs (TC) are the sum of FC and total VC

Calculation of fixed, variable and total
costs
     Based on the above definitions, we can calculate several different types of costs

Formulas to calculate different types of costs
Type of cost                              Formula

TC                                        = Total FC + total VC

Total VC                                  = VC per unit × quantity

Average TC (unit cost)                    = TC ÷ quantity produced




                               © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   7
VC per unit                          = Total VC ÷ quantity produced
                                                                                              Your notes
Example: cost calculations where variable costs = $60
 Output (Q)      FC     TVC = $ 60 × Q     TC = TFC + TVC     AVC =
                                                                          TVC
                                                                                AC = Q
                                                                                       TC
                                                                           Q


      0          200          -                 200                  -             -

      1          200          60                260                  60           260

      2          200         120                320                  60           160

      3          200         180                380                  60          126.67

      4          200         240                440                  60           110

      5          200         300                500                  60           100

      6          200         360                560                  60          93.33

      7          200         420                620                  60          88.57

      8          200         480                680                  60           85


Variable costs per unit
   VC per unit are calculated by adding together the cost of each component or raw
   material used to produce the unit




  Worked Example
  Rosebud Aromas manufactures luxury scented candles. The production of each
  candle incurs the following VC:

   VC                                                 Cost per candle (£)

   Wax                                                        0.14

   Perfume oil                                                0.72

   Telephone bill                                            24.32

   Glass jar                                                  1.46




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   8
   Outer packaging                                                 0.33
                                                                                                   Your notes
  Calculate the VC in pounds sterling for each candle.
  Step 1: Identify the VC in the list
  A telephone bill is classified as an FC, so it should not be included in the calculation. [1]
  Step 2: Total the VC listed

                      = £ 0 . 14 + £ 0 . 72 + £ 1 . 46 + £ 0 . 33
                      = £ 2 . 65


  Examiner Tips and Tricks
  Take care when calculating VC per unit, as it is likely that one or more FC will be
  included in the list, as seen above.


Diagrammatic representation of costs
Fixed costs




                        Graph showing fixed costs and output level


  The firm has to pay its fixed costs, which do not change according to output
  The FC for this firm are $4,000

Variable costs



                              © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   9
                                                                                                 Your notes




                 Graph showing total variable costs and output level


  The VC initially rises proportionally with output, as shown in the diagram
  At some point, the firm will benefit from purchasing economies of scale, and the rise will
  no longer be proportional

Total costs




 Graph showing a cost analysis involving the fixed cost, variable cost and output level


  The TC are the sum of the VC and FC
  The TC cannot be zero, as all firms have some level of FC

Average total costs



                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   10
                                                                                                Your notes




                  Graph showing average total cost and output level


 As a firm grows, it can increase its scale of output, generating efficiencies that lower its
 average total costs (AC) of production
 These efficiencies are called economies of scale
 As a firm continues increasing its scale of output, it will reach a point where its AC will
 start to increase
 The reasons for the increase in the average costs are called diseconomies of scale

Contribution
 Contribution refers to a product’s selling price minus the VC directly involved in
 producing that unit


 Contribution can be calculated using the following formula:

          Contribution   = Selling price per unit − Variable cost per unit
 It is called "contribution", as this amount contributes towards paying off the FC of the
 business
     Once the FC have been paid off, the contribution starts to contribute to the profits
     of the business
 Contribution is used to calculate the break-even point




 Worked Example




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   11
Rosebud Aromas manufactures luxury scented candles. The production of each
candle incurs the following VC:
                                                                                              Your notes
 VC                                                   Cost per candle (£)

 Wax                                                           0.14

 Perfume oil                                                  0.72

 Glass jar                                                     1.46

 Outer packaging                                              0.33

Each candle is sold for an average wholesale price of £15 to retail outlets. Calculate
the contribution for each candle.
Step 1: Calculate the total VC per candle

                  = £ 0 . 14 + £ 0 . 72 + £ 1 . 46 + £ 0 . 33
                  = £ 2 . 65
Step 2: Deduct the total VC per candle from the selling price

                              = £ 15. 00 − £ 2 . 65
                              = £ 12. 35




                         © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   12
Break-even
                                                                                             Your notes

Using the contribution to calculate the
break-even point
 The contribution value is used to calculate the break-even point
 The break-even point is where total revenue earned for a product is exactly equal to its
 total costs and where the business is making neither a profit nor a loss
 It is calculated using the formula

                                                        Fixed costs
                   Break   ‐ even point      =          Contribution

 The break-even point is expressed in units (e.g. the number of scented candles)
 Identifying the break-even point allows a business to understand how many items it
 needs to produce and sell to cover all costs before it starts to make a profit
     Each subsequent unit sold past this point will generate profit for the business




 Worked Example
                   Cost and revenue data for Canterbury Glamping

  Cost/revenue                                                           Cost (£)

  Revenue per pod per night                                                 95

  Variable costs per pod per night                                          19

  Annual fixed costs                                                     55,000

 Using the information in the table, calculate how many pods need to be occupied
 each month for Canterbury Glamping to break even. [4]
 Step 1: State the formula to calculate the break-even point

                                                 Fixed costs
                   Break ‐ even point =                       [1]
                                                 Contribution
 Step 2: Calculate the contribution




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   13
                 = Selling price − variable cost per unit
                                                                                             Your notes
                 = £ 95 − £ 19                                         [1]


                 = £ 76
 Step 3: Apply the formula to calculate the break-even point

                                       £ 55,000
                                  =       £ 76 [1]

                                  = 723 . 68
 Step 4: Always round up to the nearest whole number because only whole
 products can be sold

                             = 724 camping pods [1]
Margin of safety
 The margin of safety is the difference between the actual level of output of a business
 and its break-even level of output
 The margin of safety can be calculated using the following formula:

   Margin of safety    = Actual level of output − Break ‐ even level of output


 Worked Example
 The cost, sales and revenue for an electric bicycle manufacturer are presented in the
 table below.

  Annual fixed costs                                                £42,000

  Selling price per unit                                                £750

  Variable cost per unit                                                £350

  Number of units sold                                                   240

 Using the data, calculate the margin of safety. You are advised to show your workings.
 Step 1: Calculate the contribution

                                 = £ 750 − £ 350
                                 = £ 400


                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   14
   Step 2: Calculate the break-even point

                                            £ 42,000                                           Your notes
                                      =       £ 400

                                      = 105 units
   Step 3: Calculate the margin of safety

                               = 240 units − 105 units
                               = 135 units
Interpretation of break-even charts
    A break-even chart is a visual representation of the break-even point and is used to
    identify the following
        Fixed costs, total costs and revenue over a range of output
        The break-even point, where total costs are equal to revenue
        The profit or loss made at each level of output
        The margin of safety

An example break-even chart




The break-even chart for A2B Limited shows that at 324 units, the total revenue = the total
                                        costs


Diagram analysis

                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   15
 Fixed costs do not change as output increases
     A2B's fixed costs are £8,000, and these do not change whether the business               Your notes
     produces zero units or 500 units
 Total costs are made up of fixed and variable costs
     At zero units of output, they are made up exclusively of fixed costs
     At 500 units, the total variable costs equate to £11,800
     This line slopes upwards because total variable costs increase as output increases
 The revenue line also slopes upwards
     At zero units of output, the revenue is £0
     At 500 units, the total revenue equates to £11,800
     Revenue will increase with the output
     The line will slope more steeply than the total costs and will cross the total costs
     line at some point
 The point at which the total costs and the revenue lines cross is the break-even point
     The break-even level of output for A2B is 324 units
 The margin of safety can be identified as the difference on the x-axis between the
 actual level of output (in this case, 450 units) and the break-even point
 The profit made at a specific level of output can be identified as the space between the
 revenue and total cost lines
     In this instance, the profit made at 450 units of output is £14,400 − £11,250 = £3,150

Limitations of break-even analysis




                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   16
                                                                                               Your notes




The limitations of break-even analysis include the assumption that all output is sold




Examiner Tips and Tricks
When assessing break-even analysis, ensure that you explain why it has an important
internal planning role, but don’t forget that it has a significant external role as well.
Break-even analysis should be included in a business plan when a business is trying to
secure external finance. Businesses looking to borrow money or attract investors
seeking to manage their risk should take care to model the break-even point, margin
of safety and level of profit (or loss) at different levels of output and prepare
themselves to be scrutinised on the figures.




                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   17
 Budgets
                                                                                                Your notes

The purpose of budgets
  A budget is a financial plan that a business (or department in the business) sets for costs
  and revenue
      The budget is usually closely aligned with the business objective

Reasons for using budgets
      Reason                                        Explanation

    Planning and             Businesses that use budgets are actively planning ahead
     monitoring
                             Problems and their solutions may be considered and solved
                             in advance

      Control                Frequent monitoring of budgets allows managers to
                             precisely control their functional area
                             Budgets support the setting and review of company or
                             department objectives

  Coordination and           Budgeting requires different parts of a business to operate
   communication             as part of a coordinated whole
                             Budgets may be communicated throughout the
                             organisation to provide a framework for decision-making
                             and communication

   Motivation and            Budgets play an important role in target-setting and
    efficiency               performance management, which can be used by managers
                             to measure success
                             The allocation of budgets spreads decision-making across
                             the organisation, acting as a motivator to the managers who
                             control the budgets



Types of budgets
  Budgets are usually set annually and then monitored on a monthly basis
  Businesses may set budgets to monitor the financial performance of any aspect of the
  business
  Budgets are generally prepared using one of two methods:
      Historical figure budgets




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   18
      Zero-based budgeting
Historical figure budgets                                                                      Your notes
  Budgets are usually based on historical data (e.g. sales and costs data from previous
  years) and allow for factors such as inflation and other relevant economic indicators
  (e.g. exchange rate variations)

Zero-based budgeting
  In some cases, businesses make the decision not to allocate budgets and use a zero-
  budgeting approach
      This is particularly useful when a business needs to control costs closely (e.g. to
      improve profitability)
  Zero budgeting requires all spending to be justified, which means that many
  unnecessary costs can be eliminated
      It can be time-consuming, as evidence to support spending decisions needs to be
      collected and presented
      Zero budgeting also requires skilled and confident employees to make a
      persuasive case to convince those who are making purchasing decisions

Variance analysis
  A budget variance is the difference between the figure budgeted and the actual figure
  achieved by the end of the budgetary period (e.g. 12 months)
  Variance analysis seeks to determine the reasons for the differences between the
  actual figures and the budgeted figures

Favourable variances
  A favourable variance is when the actual figure achieved is better than the budgeted
  figure
      A favourable variance in a revenue or profit budget is when the actual figure is
      higher than the budgeted figure
      A favourable variance in a costs budget is when the actual figure is lower than the
      budgeted figure

Adverse variances
  An adverse variance is when the actual figure achieved is worse than the budgeted
  figure
      An adverse variance in a revenue or profit budget is when the actual figure is lower
      than the budgeted figure
      An adverse variance in a costs budget is when the actual figure is higher than the
      budgeted figure




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   19
Worked Example                                                                                Your notes
Selected financial information for Bunsen PLC in 2022

                                                                           ￡ m

 Budgeted sales revenue                                                   12,460

 Actual sales revenue                                                     13,718

 Budgeted total costs                                                     8,420

 Actual total costs                                                       10,627

Using the data, calculate the total profit variance for Bunsen PLC in 2022. You are
advised to show your workings. [4]
Step 1: Calculate the budgeted profit for 2022

                            = £ 12,460 − £ 8,420
                                                          [1]
                            = £ 4,040
Step 2: Calculate the actual profit for 2022

                           = £ 13,718 − £ 10,627
                                                           [1]
                           = £ 3,091
Step 3: Subtract the budgeted profit from the actual profit for 2022

                            = £ 3,091 − £ 4,040
                                                         [1]
                            = £ 949
Step 4: Identify the nature of the variance
    In this case, the variance is adverse because the actual profit for 2022 is lower
    than the budgeted profit for 2022
    The correct answer is £949 in adverse variance [1]




Examiner Tips and Tricks
Although the Bunsen PLC example shows an adverse profit variance, it is worth noting
that the company’s actual sales revenue was higher than budgeted. There could be
some sales executives in the business who deserve some sincere congratulations!
You may recommend that the business investigate the reasons for the adverse profit
variance. The focus of the examination must be on the higher-than-budgeted costs



                         © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   20
   rather than on this seemingly positive sales performance. You may recommend that
   Bunsen review its supply agreements or that it adopt a zero-budgeting approach.
                                                                                                Your notes
    Once variances have been identified, a business should carefully investigate the
    reasons why the variances have occurred and take appropriate action, such as:
        Where adverse cost variances are identified, a business may seek alternative
        suppliers or investigate ways to improve efficiency
        Where adverse sales variances are identified, a business may review its marketing
        activities to improve their effectiveness
        Where favourable cost variances are identified, a business may review key quality
        indicators such as the volume of returns or waste levels to ensure that output
        standards are being met
        Where favourable sales variances occur, a business may reward client-facing staff
        with performance-based incentives

Difficulties of budgeting
    Budgeting requires significant expertise to be of genuine use to a business, and there
    are several difficulties associated with its construction

The main difficulties of budgeting




Difficulties of budgeting include the time and skill to set, monitor and review them, as well
              as unachievable budgets having a negative impact on motivation


    Data must be up-to-date, accurate and free of bias
        Sources of data must be selected carefully and used with care to ensure the most
        appropriate assumptions are made



                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   21
    Those who are constructing budgets will require skills and relevant experience to
    do so effectively
                                                                                          Your notes
    This may involve training or the recruitment of specialist staff
Budgets can encourage managers to focus on the short-term rather than the long-
term success of the business, as budgets are usually set year to year
    Unrealistic budgets (over or under) can lead to a lack of motivation among those
    tasked to achieve the financial plan
Conflict between budget holders may arise, reducing the effectiveness of the business
as a whole




                       © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   22
