      Edexcel A Level Business                                                        Your notes


1.1 Meeting Customer Needs
Contents
  The Market
  Market Research
  Market Positioning




                       © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.   Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   1
 The Market
                                                                                               Your notes

An introduction to marketing
  A market is any place where buyers and sellers can meet, e.g. amazon.co.uk or a
  shopping mall
  Different markets have varying characteristics and are affected differently by changes
  The aim of marketing is to help identify, anticipate and satisfy consumer needs and
  wants profitably
      Needs are considered essential, e.g. shelter or food
      Wants are desires that are non-essential, even if consumers consider them to be
      essential, e.g. Nike trainers
  Market research is essential in helping businesses identify products and services they
  can develop in response to the needs and wants of their customers
      Market research is the process of systematically gathering data from consumers
      that can be used to influence business decisions

Mass markets and niche markets
The characteristics of markets
  In mass markets, products are aimed at broad market segments; e.g. Kellogg's Corn
  Flakes is an example of a breakfast cereal aimed at the mass market
      Market segments are groups of consumers who share similar characteristics, e.g.
      age, lifestyle
      Mass marketing occurs when businesses sell their products to most of the available
      market
      Production usually happens on a large scale
  In niche markets, products are aimed at a subset of the larger market, e.g. gluten-free
  products
      Niche marketing occurs when businesses identify and satisfy the demands of a
      small group of consumers within the wider market
      Production usually happens on a small scale

Characteristics of Mass Markets and Niche Markets
               Mass Markets                                   Niche Markets

   Products are less unique, as they are            Products are more specialised and
   aimed at broad market segments                   unique, as they are aimed at narrow
                                                    market segments



                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   2
   Low average costs due to large-scale               High average costs due to small-
   production economies of scale                      scale production
                                                                                                Your notes
   Low prices lead to greater affordability                They do not benefit from
   and higher sales volumes                                economies of scale
   Low prices lead to lower profit margins            High prices make products less
                                                      affordable and lead to lower sales
   Primark is an example of a clothing                volumes
   company that focuses its products on the
   mass market                                        High prices can allow businesses to
                                                      earn a higher profit margin
                                                      Louis Vuitton is an example of a
                                                      fashion company that aims its
                                                      products at a niche market


Market size and market share
  The size of a market can be measured through sales volume or sales value
      Sales volume is the number of products sold, i.e. the physical number of units sold
      Sales revenue = price × quantity sold, i.e. the financial value of the units sold
  The market share that a business enjoys is the proportion of the total sales of a
  product/service compared to the market as a whole; e.g. Tesco has 26% of the UK
  grocery market
  Market share can be calculated as follows:

                              Sales of a business
                           Total sales in the market
                                                         × 100



  Worked Example
  In 2022, the UK coffee shop market was worth £4.6bn. Sales of Starbucks Coffee
  totalled £328m in 2022.
  Using the data, calculate, to two decimal places, the market share of Starbucks
  Coffee in the coffee shop / café market. You are advised to show your workings.
                                                                                          [4]
  Step 1: Identify the annual sales of Starbucks Coffee

                                       = £ 328m
  Step 2: Identify the total market sales in the coffee shop market

                                     = £ 4 . 6bn [1]
  Step 3: Substitute the figures into the formula


                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   3
                                  Sales of a business
                           = Total sales in the market × 100 [1]
                                                                                              Your notes
                                      £ 328m
                                 = £ 4 . 6bn × 100 [1]
 Step 4: Present the answer rounded to two decimal places

                                     = 7 . 13% [1]


 Examiner Tips and Tricks
     By providing the formula and showing your working out, even if you do not get the
     right answer, you will still be able to gain some marks.

Brands
  A brand is a name, image or logo that helps a product or service stand out from its
  competitors
  Branding is one of the key ways businesses achieve product differentiation




                                 Some famous brands


  Brands are unique and protected by law
  Brands add value, often making the product or service more desirable to consumers
      Adding value is the process by which firms increase the price that the consumer is
      willing to pay
  Brands influence the position of the business within its market
      Businesses operating in mass markets use branding to stand out from the
      competition
      Businesses operating in niche markets use branding to communicate their offering
      to a small, well-defined group of consumers




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   4
      Strong brands are more likely to be able to charge higher prices for their products
      than weaker brands
                                                                                                  Your notes
      The perceived quality of a strong brand's products is better than that of weaker
      brands

Dynamic markets
  A dynamic market is a market that is subject to rapid or continuous changes
  Many markets are becoming more competitive, making change inevitable
      Those businesses that do not adapt are less likely to survive in the long run
      The mobile phone market is a good example of a dynamic market
  Businesses with monopoly power (e.g. Amazon) might not face the same dynamic
  pressures as businesses in more competitive markets
  Many markets are dynamic, but others change very slowly; e.g. the market for eggs and
  milk has been relatively stable for years




       Changing technology ensures that the mobile phone market is dynamic


  There are four areas to consider when examining dynamic markets
      Online retailing
      How markets change
      Innovation and market growth
      Adapting to change

1. Online retailing
  Online retailing involves selling products via the internet
    The advantages and disadvantages of online retailing for firms and consumers

                Advantages                                       Disadvantages




                             © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   5
   Provides business access to more                 There may be high costs for website
   consumers, including internationally             development, maintenance and
                                                                                             Your notes
                                                    promotion
   Enables longer trading hours, as the
   business is open 24/7                            Online retailing is dominated by
                                                    well-known large businesses
   Cheaper to run, as it lowers fixed and
   variable costs compared to brick-and-            High levels of competition mean
   mortar retailers                                 that it will be expensive to make a
                                                    website stand out
   Businesses can collect data by tracking
   consumer behaviour, which helps with             There is a lack of personal contact
   primary market research                          with customers
   Consumers can receive offers that they           Consumers may find it difficult to
   are more likely to benefit from                  get their desired level of customer
                                                    service
   Consumers can shop at a time that suits
   them                                             Consumers may find it difficult to
                                                    return unwanted products
                                                    Online purchasing opens
                                                    consumers up to credit card fraud


2. How markets change
  Changing market conditions offer new opportunities for firms but also pose threats
  The following changes cause markets to be dynamic:
      Changing consumer tastes and preferences, e.g. consumers desiring electric
      vehicles in place of traditional petrol/diesel cars
      Changing demographics; e.g. many developed countries have an increasingly
      older population who have different wants and needs compared to previous
      markets
      The amount of competition; e.g. international trade means larger market sizes but
      also more competition between an increasing number of firms
          Competition can be direct, i.e. the sale of similar products, or indirect, e.g.
          airlines competing with each other but also with other forms of transport, such
          as trains
      Changing legislation; e.g. laws that strengthen environmental standards often
      create new markets

3. Innovation and market growth
  Product innovation involves the adaptation or improvement of existing products, e.g.
  improved video cameras on laptops
  Process innovation involves the adaptation or improvement of existing processes, e.g.
  just-in-time stock control




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   6
  Market growth is the measurement of the change in the entire market, expressed as a
  percentage of the original size
                                                                                             Your notes
      A business's market share does not necessarily increase automatically as the entire
      market continues to grow
  Market growth can be caused by numerous factors. For example:
      Increasing population sizes can increase demand in certain markets
      Increasing incomes can increase demand in certain markets
      Changing tastes and preferences can cause the market to grow, e.g. the growth in
      the electric car market




 Worked Example
 Sales of electric vehicles were 267,203 in 2022. This was a 40% increase from the
 previous year.
 Calculate the number of electric vehicles sold in the UK in 2021. Round your answer to
 the nearest whole car. You are advised to show your workings.
                                                                                     [4]
 Step 1: Find the number of electric cars sold in 2022

                                     = 267,203 [1]
 Step 2: Reduce 267,203 by 40%

                       = 267,203 ÷ 140 = 1,908 . 59
                       = 1,908 . 59 × 100                       [2]


                       = 190,859
 Step 3: Express your answer to the nearest whole number of vehicles
 2021 UK sales = 190,859 electric vehicles [1]

4. Adapting to change
  Recognising and adapting to market changes allows businesses to thrive in dynamic
  markets
  Strategies to adapt to change include:
      Create flexible business structures, especially in terms of operations and people
      management
      Meet customer needs by carrying out market research and communicating with
      customers



                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   7
     Invest in staff training, new products and processes
     Innovate so as to gain the first mover advantage                                         Your notes
How competition affects the market
 Competition occurs when at least two businesses are providing goods/services to the
 same target market
     The more businesses in the market, the more intense the competition
 Competition can be direct or indirect
     Direct competition occurs when the business is targeting customers with the same
     product as a competitor
     Indirect competition occurs when firms sell different products but compete with
     each other for customers' disposable income; e.g. cinema and theatre companies
     are in indirect competition
 Competition results in many benefits for the customer, such as:
     Businesses offer lower prices
     Businesses produce better quality products
     Businesses provide better customer service
 The absence of competition reduces incentives for businesses to innovate, be efficient
 or offer consumers lower prices

The difference between risk and
uncertainty




                    The difference between risk and uncertainty


 Risk is the potential threat to business success
     Risks can be from inside the business (internal) or from outside the business
     (external)



                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   8
     Risks can be measured and prepared for using risk management
  Uncertainty occurs when outcomes are difficult to predict
Examples of risk and uncertainty                                                                Your notes

                  Risk                                       Uncertainty

   Technical failures due to the                Businesses continue to face uncertainty
   breakdown of essential equipment             after Britain's exit from the European Union
   Cybersecurity threats                        Will the economy go into recession?
   Loss of key staff members                    Will energy prices continue to rise?
   Currency fluctuations for firms              What will happen to interest rates?
   trading internationally
                                                How will rivals react to a new product
                                                launch?




  Examiner Tips and Tricks
  You can make use of the concepts of risk and uncertainty in strategy-focused
  questions. For example, when evaluating a particular strategy, you could explain the
  possible risks as well as the rewards associated with it.
  Moreover, there are no certainties in business, so outlining potential uncertainties
  before making a recommendation at the end of an essay is a good way to
  demonstrate evaluation skills.




                             © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   9
 Market Research
                                                                                                   Your notes

Product and market orientation
   Product orientation is an approach to marketing that focuses on the characteristics of
   the product rather than the needs of the consumer
       The emphasis will be on creating a product first and then finding a market
           The business has a belief that the product is superior; i.e. it will sell itself
       Over time, being too product-oriented means the business may move further and
       further away from what the market is looking for, thus increasing the risk of business
       failure
           E.g. Gillette's razors can be classified as a product-oriented business, as the
           business focuses on the quality of its products, and regular innovations aim to
           increase sales




  Product orientation is an approach often used by inventors who research, test and
          produce a product well before market research has taken place


   Market orientation is an approach to marketing that focuses on the needs of
   consumers and uses this information to design products that meet customer needs
       Consumers are at the centre of marketing decisions
       Products will be developed that respond to consumer needs
       The business is likely to benefit from increased demand, increased profits and a
       valued brand image, as its products are desirable
           E.g. universities often develop new courses based on the feedback they
           receive from students and employers




Market orientation aims to develop products to meet the needs identified by consumers
                          during the market research process



                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.          Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   10
Primary and secondary market research
data                                                                                           Your notes

  Market research is the collection, compilation and analysis of information about a
  market
  Effective market research will help the business:
      Reduce risk when launching new products or entering new markets
      Anticipate the future needs and wants of consumers
      Understand consumer behaviour
      Identify potential consumer demand
      Identify how much consumers are prepared to pay for a product/service
      Identify competitors and gauge their potential strengths and weaknesses
  Market research data can be quantitative or qualitative
      Both forms are useful, and any data analysis should ideally include a combination of
      the two

Primary research
  Primary research is the process of gathering information directly from consumers in the
  target market using field research methods, such as surveys, interviews, etc.
      Primary research gathers information that is new and does not necessarily exist in
      any format

Primary research methods
  Method                                      Explanation

  Surveys          The most widely used primary research method is sampling a
                   population by using surveys
                   This is where you would ask a series of questions to a certain number
                   of people (respondents)
                   The results from the sample are used to make inferences. This is
                   where the results of the sample are extrapolated to be true for the
                   wider population
                   A wide range of respondents can be reached using online survey
                   tools, such as Survey Monkey

Observation        This involves hiring someone to stand in an appropriate location and
                   study consumer behaviour in a store or perhaps judge the potential
                   consumer traffic at a particular location




                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   11
                       Researchers may observe the impact of packaging on consumer
                       choice or the impact that the particular placement of a product
                       in a store may have on consumer choice                                 Your notes
 Interviews        These questions may be set up in a very similar way to a survey;
                   however, an interviewer asks the questions
                   This method takes longer but does allow the interviewee to ask
                   follow-up questions and gather information that could easily be
                   missed when conducting surveys

   Test            Free samples are provided for a limited period to the target market to
 marketing         gauge their response to the product

  Focus            Free-range discussions, led by a marketing specialist,
  groups           collect detailed feedback from a group of people in the target
                   market
                   Usually limited to a small group of 12–15 people
                   The group typically meets for 1.5 to 3 hours


Advantages and disadvantages of primary market research
              Advantages                                  Disadvantages

   Information gathering is focused on        The sample size may be too small and
   the needs of the business and will         unrepresentative of all customers, leading
   not be available to its rivals             to unreliable results

   The business can get in-depth              Bias may mean that researchers can guide
   information from respondents, for          respondents to answer questions in a
   example, the reasons behind                particular way
   certain behaviour
                                                   Similarly, respondents may be
                                                   influenced by the responses of others
                                                   or may not provide accurate
                                                   information

   Primary market research is more            A business may need to hire a specialist
   up-to-date and can be used to ask          market research agency to help, but this
   specific questions, so it will be          process can be expensive and time-
   more relevant                              consuming


Secondary research
  Secondary research involves the collection, compilation and analysis of data that
  already exists




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   12
      Typical methods include purchasing market reports from specialist companies or
      accessing government statistical portals that provide useful information
Advantages and disadvantages of secondary market                                                Your notes
research
                 Advantages                                    Disadvantages

   Information is already available, so it is          Information has been collected for
   quicker to collect than through primary             other purposes and so may lack
   research, thereby saving time                       relevance or may not be factually
                                                       correct, e.g. Wikipedia

   Information is often free (e.g. government          It can be expensive to purchase
   websites and internet sources such as               market-specific secondary data
   Statista) or cheap to collect, leading to           from specialist companies, e.g.
   lower costs compared to primary research            Mintel reports

   It is suitable for a small business that lacks a    The information may be out of
   large marketing budget and/or expertise             date, especially in dynamic
                                                       markets



Using ICT to support market research
  ICT refers to information and communications technology
  It can be used to support market research in the following ways:

Company websites
  Websites allow businesses to collect primary data cheaply, such as tracking consumer
  searches and analysing customer reviews, as well as collecting secondary data about
  rivals, e.g. prices and special offers
  Pop-ups used on websites can also be an effective way of gathering information

Databases
  These can be used to store large amounts of customer information, e.g. Tesco loyalty
  cards
  Databases are also effective in collating customer email addresses so that targeted
  customers can be surveyed later via email

Social networking
  This focuses on gathering information about consumers via online social channels,
  such as Twitter and Facebook
  It is also useful as a method of running quick polls and surveys or tracking opinions about
  brands




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   13
Market segmentation
                                                                                               Your notes
  Market segmentation is the process by which a single market is divided into
  submarkets, or segments
      Each segment represents a slightly different set of consumer characteristics
      Firms often segment their markets according to factors such as income,
      geographical location, religion, gender and/or lifestyle
  A market for a good such as crisps is not simply seen as one market; i.e. the crisp market
  is divided into many market segments, such as:
      Dinner party snacks (Walkers Sensations, Pringles, Burts) with a premium price are
      targeted at middle to upper earners/professionals
      Health-conscious crisps (Walker's Lite, Walkers Baked, Ryvita Lite) are targeted at
      the health-conscious market
      Lunch box value snacks (multipacks, Hula Hoops) are targeted at families and the
      mass market

Advantages and disadvantages of market segmentation
               Advantages                                    Disadvantages

   Recognises that consumers are not all            Not everyone within a segment will
   identical                                        behave in the same way
   Consumer groups do not all share the
   same tastes and preferences

   Products and marketing activities can            It may be difficult to identify a
   be altered to meet the different needs           segment, and consumers can belong
   of different groups of consumers and             to multiple segments at the same
   targeted more precisely                          time

   Less expensive and wasteful than                 Segmentation requires more
   marketing products to wide market                detailed market research, which can
   segments                                         prove costly — but beneficial — to the
                                                    business

   May increase loyalty if the consumer             A market segment may be identified,
   feels that their needs are being met,            but it may be too small and
   which can lead to repeat purchases               unprofitable to cater to




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   14
 Market Positioning
                                                                                               Your notes

Market positioning and market
mapping
   Market positioning refers to the process a business goes through when launching a new
   product or service
       The business decides where it wants to position its product in the market with
       regard to price, quality, branding and customer perception
   Market mapping is a tool for identifying the position of a product within a market
       A market map refers to a two-dimensional diagram that shows the attributes or
       characteristics of a product in comparison to rivals’ products
       Only two criteria can be chosen: price and quality, age and income, etc.




m&m's has positioned itself as low price and low quality in this example of a market map


Market map analysis
   If there were no spaces left on the market map, it indicates that the market is saturated
       This means that there are no opportunities to exploit a market niche in the market
       Competition is likely to be high and profits low
   However, the existence of a space on the market map may indicate the existence of a
   market niche
       This needs to be researched carefully before the business commits. E.g. it looks like
       there is a gap in the market in the high price / low quality area in the map above
       However, this gap does not represent a worthwhile market, as the business would
       find it impossible to build and maintain a loyal customer base



                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   15
The usefulness and limitations of market mapping
                    Usefulness                                    Limitations                 Your notes

   Market gaps can be identified that may enable           A gap in the market may exist
   a business to come up with ideas for new                because it is not profitable to
   products                                                fill
   Comparisons can be made between a                       Mapping a market may require
   business’s products and those of its rivals — i.e.      primary research, which can
   where are the business’s products positioned            be expensive
   relative to its rivals?
                                                           Only two criteria can be
   Market maps are simple to construct and offer           chosen, which may prove too
   a visual illustration of the position of a product      simplistic
   in the market
                                                           Markets are often dynamic,
                                                           and a market map only
                                                           provides insight at a specific
                                                           point in time



Competitive advantage of a product or
service
  Competitive advantage refers to the features of a business and its products that are
  perceived as superior to its rivals by customers
  It is how a firm’s product is made both distinctive and defensible
      Distinctive means that the product is different from those of competitors
      Defensible means that the business can prevent competitors from copying the
      product

Source of competitive advantage




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   16
                                                                                                Your notes




     Sources of competitive advantage include reliability, design and quality


 There are many ways a firm can gain a competitive advantage, including:
     Innovation and reputation (branding)
     Building strong relationships with stakeholders
     Adding value
     Differentiation
     Market segmentation
     Price leadership
 Examples of the source of a business's competitive advantage include:
     Quality; e.g. Audi is well known for the exceptional quality of the finishing inside its
     cars
     Delivery times; e.g. Amazon Prime delivers products within 24 hours of ordering
     Low price; e.g. Primark is considered to provide the best value / low price
     combination
     Reliability; e.g. Apple Macs have an excellent reputation for long life and reliability
     Ethical stance; e.g. Tony's Chocolonely only uses cocoa in its chocolate, which is
     100% free of slave/child production
     Design; e.g. Dyson vacuum cleaners stand out from the crowd with their original
     design

The purpose of product differentiation
 Product differentiation is an attempt by a business to distinguish its products from
 those of competitors



                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   17
      This involves creating functions or features of the product (or firm) that help it to
      stand out from its competitors
                                                                                                Your notes
      Strong product differentiation helps the firm develop its competitive advantage
      The development of product differentiation often helps a firm create a unique
      selling point for its product, which can be used in marketing
     Product differentiation may be tangible (clearly visible), or it may be a perception
     that is created about the product in the consumer's mind
  Successful product differentiation helps the business to increase demand for its
  products, increase brand loyalty and allow the business to charge higher prices
  Examples of successful product differentiation include:
      In 2014, Hyundai in Singapore introduced a three-year warranty on all its new cars,
      when the industry standard was one year
      Green & Black's uses Fairtrade cocoa and sugar in the production of its chocolate

Adding value to products/services
  Adding value is the difference between the price that is charged to the customer and
  the cost of inputs required to create the product or service
      E.g. customers are prepared to pay more for potatoes when they are packaged as
      oven chips than they would be willing to pay for a bag of whole potatoes

Methods of adding value




       Some methods of adding value include design, packaging and branding


  The methods of adding value overlap with some of the features of product
  differentiation:
      Marketing and branding
      Building brand identification and customer loyalty to the brand allows a firm to




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   18
     charge a higher price for its products, thus increasing the added value
         E.g. Yeezy 350 V2 sneakers sell for $250 a pair                                         Your notes
     Functions and features
     Adding unique features allows a firm to charge a higher price for its products, thus
     increasing the added value
          E.g. The Samsung Galaxy Watch5 has robust health tracking tools built into it,
          along with an amazing screen
     Customer service
     Businesses that ensure they have a good reputation for customer service can
     charge a higher price for their products, thus increasing the added value
          E.g. John Lewis is considered to provide the best customer service amongst
          department stores in the UK
     Customisation
     Allowing customers to design or create their products allows a firm to charge a
     higher price, thus increasing the added value
          E.g. Moonpig birthday cards can be completely customised
     Packaging
     Apple products are well known for their superior packaging, which creates an
     exciting opening experience for the customer. This allows the firm to charge a higher
     price for its products, thus increasing the added value




Examiner Tips and Tricks
Businesses may use several methods of adding value.
Adding value often raises costs, but it is worth it if the increase in selling price
outweighs the costs associated with the method.
For example, if improving the packaging costs £1 per unit and the firm can raise its
selling price by £1,40 per unit, then profitability will improve.




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   19
