  Edexcel International AS                                                           Your notes
Chemistry
Energetics
Contents
  Enthalpy Level Diagrams
  Enthalpy Change - Definitions
  Using Calorimetry
  Using Hess Cycles
  Bond Enthalpies




                      © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.   Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   1
 Enthalpy Level Diagrams
                                                                                                Your notes

Enthalpy Level Diagrams
  The total chemical energy inside a substance is called the enthalpy (or heat content)
  When chemical reactions take place, changes in chemical energy take place and
  therefore the enthalpy changes
  An enthalpy change is represented by the symbol ΔH (Δ= change; H = enthalpy)
  An enthalpy change can be positive or negative




  Examiner Tips and Tricks
  Activation energy is not shown in enthalpy level diagrams
  Activation is shown in reaction profile diagrams

Exothermic reactions
  A reaction is exothermic when the products have less energy than the reactants
  Heat energy is given off by the reaction to the surroundings
      The temperature of the environment increases - this can be measured with a
      thermometer
      The energy of the system decreases
  There is an enthalpy decrease during the reaction so ΔH is negative
  Exothermic reactions are thermodynamically possible (because the enthalpy of the
  reactants is higher than that of the products)
  However, if the rate is too slow, the reaction may not occur
      In this case the reaction is kinetically controlled




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   2
                                                                                               Your notes




                  The enthalpy change during an exothermic reaction
Endothermic reactions
  A reaction is endothermic when the products have more energy than the reactants
  Heat energy is absorbed by the reaction from the surroundings
      The temperature of the environment decreases - this can be measured with a
      thermometer
      The energy of the system increases
  There is an enthalpy increase during the reaction so ΔH is positive




                 The enthalpy change during an endothermic reaction




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   3
  Examiner Tips and Tricks
                                                                                                  Your notes
  It is important to specify the physical states of each species in an equation when
  dealing with enthalpy changes as any changes in state can cause very large changes
  of enthalpy. For example:
                     NaCl (s) → Na+ (aq) + Cl- (aq) ΔH = +4 kJ mol-1
                     NaCl (g) → Na+ (g) + Cl- (g) ΔH = +500 kJ mol-1
  Also, remember that the system is the substances that are reacting (i.e. the reaction
  itself) and the surroundings is everything else (e.g. the flask the reaction is taking
  place in).

Reaction profile diagrams
  Reaction profile diagrams are similar to enthalpy level diagrams
      The difference between the energy level of the reactants and the energy level of the
      products is still the overall enthalpy change of the reaction, ΔH
  The main differences are that they include information about:
      The activation energy, Ea, of the reaction
           Activation energy can be defined as ‘the minimum amount of energy needed
           for reactant molecules to have a successful collision and start the reaction’
           This is the difference between the energy level of the reactants and the peak of
           the curve
      Possible transition states
           The peak of the curve indicates a transition state
           The transition state is a stage during the reaction at which chemical bonds are
           partially broken and formed
           The transition state is very unstable – a molecule in the transition state cannot be
           isolated and is higher in energy than the reactants and products

Exothermic reaction profiles
  In an exothermic reaction, the reactants are higher in energy than the products
  The reactants are therefore closer in energy to the transition state
  This means that exothermic reactions have a lower activation energy compared to
  endothermic reactions




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.          Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   4
                                                                                              Your notes




            The reaction profile diagram for a general exothermic reaction
Endothermic reaction profiles
  In an endothermic reaction, the reactants are lower in energy than the products
  The reactants are therefore further away in energy from the transition state
  This means that endothermic reactions have a higher activation energy compared to
  exothermic reactions




           The reaction profile diagram for a general endothermic reaction




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   5
 Enthalpy Change - Definitions
                                                                                                 Your notes

Enthalpy Change - Definitions
  To be able to compare the changes in enthalpy between reactions, all thermodynamic
  measurements are carried out under standard conditions
  These standard conditions are:
      A pressure of 100 kPa (you may see some older exam questions that use a figure of
      101 kPa; the exact figure is 101 325 Pa, but it has been simplified in the current
      syllabus for problem-solving purposes)
      A temperature of 298 K (25 oC)
      Each substance involved in the reaction is in its standard physical state (solid, liquid
      or gas)
  To show that a reaction has been carried out under standard conditions, the symbol ‘ ’ is
  used
      ΔH = the standard enthalpy change

  There are a number of standard definitions relating to enthalpy changes that you are
  expected to know

Enthalpy Definitions Table




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   6
                                                                                             Your notes




A further definition that is expected knowledge, although less used at AS level, is:
    Standard enthalpy of atomisation - the enthalpy change when one mole
    of gaseous atoms is formed from an element in its standard state, under standard
    conditions




Examiner Tips and Tricks
You will see various enthalpy change symbols used with subtle changes, e.g.
                       ΔHc or ΔcH for enthalpy of combustion

Whichever symbol you use must have the following basic points:
    Δ to represent change
    H to represent enthlalpy
      to respresent standard conditions
    A symbol to represent the type of enthalpy change occurring, e.g.
        c for combustion
        f for formation



                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   7
         neut for neutralisation
         r for reaction
                                                                                                 Your notes



Worked Example
Calculating the enthalpy change of reaction
One mole water is formed from hydrogen and oxygen, releasing 286 kJ of energy
                     H2 (g) + ½O2 (g) → H2O (I)     ΔHr = -286 kJ mol-1

Calculate ΔHr for the reaction below:
                                2H2 (g) + O2 (g) → 2H2O (I)
Answer
    Since two moles of water molecules are formed in the question above, the
    energy released is simply:
    ΔHr = 2 mol x (-286 kJ mol-1) = -572 kJ mol-1




Worked Example
Calculating the enthalpy change
Calculate ΔHf for the reaction below, given that ΔHf [Fe2O3(s)] = -824.2 kJ mol-1
                              4Fe(s) + 3 O2(g) → 2 Fe2O3(s)
Answer
    Since two moles of Fe2O3 (s) are formed the total change in enthalpy for the
    reaction above is:
         ΔHf = 2 x ( -824.2 kJ mol-1) = - 1648 kJ




Worked Example
Calculating enthalpy changes
Identify each of the following as ΔHr , ΔHf , ΔHc or ΔHneut
 1. MgCO3 (s) → MgO (s) + CO2 (g)
 2. C (graphite) + O2 (g) → CO2 (g)
 3. HCl (aq) + NaOH (aq) → NaCl (aq) + H2O (I)
Answer




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   8
Answer 1: ΔHr
Answer 2: ΔHf as one mole of CO2 is formed from its elements in standard state and        Your notes
ΔHc as one mole of carbon is burnt in oxygen

Answer 3: ΔHneut as one mole of water is formed from the reaction between an acid
and an alkali




Examiner Tips and Tricks
The ΔHf of an element in its standard state is zero.
For example, ΔHf of O2(g) is 0 kJ mol-1




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.   Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   9
  Using Calorimetry
                                                                                                   Your notes

Using Calorimetry
    Calorimetry is the measurement enthalpy changes in chemical reactions
    There are two types of calorimetry experiments you need to know:
        Enthalpy changes of reactions in solution, e.g. displacement and neutralisation
        Enthalpy changes of combustion
    In both cases, you should be able to give an outline of the experiment and be able to
    process experimental data using calculations or graphical methods

Enthalpy changes for reactions in solution
    The principle of these calorimetry experiments is to carry out the reaction with an excess
    of one reagent and measure the temperature change over the course of a few minutes
    The apparatus needed to carry out an enthalpy of reaction in solution calorimetry
    experiment is shown below
        A calorimeter can be made up of a polystyrene drinking cup, a vacuum
        flask or metal can




A polystyrene cup can act as a calorimeter to find enthalpy changes in a chemical reaction
The energy needed to raise the temperature of 1 g of a substance by 1 K is called the specific
heat capacity (c) of the liquid The specific heat capacity of water is 4.18 J g-1 K-1 The energy
transferred as heat can be calculated by:




                              © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   10
                                                                                                   Your notes




               Equation for calculating energy transferred in a calorimeter
Sample method for a displacement reaction
 1. Using a measuring cylinder place 25 cm3 of the 1.0 mol dm-3 copper(II) sulphate solution
    into the polystyrene cup
 2. Weigh about 6 g of zinc powder - as this is an excess there is no need to be very accurate
 3. Draw a table to record the initial temperature and then the temperature and time every
    half minute up to 9.5 minutes
 4. Put a thermometer or temperature probe in the cup, stir, and record the temperature
    every half minute for 2.5 minutes
 5. At precisely 3 minutes, add the zinc powder to the cup (DO NOT RECORD THE
    TEMPERATURE AT 3 MINUTES)
 6. Continue stirring and record the temperature for an additional 6 minutes
   For the purposes of the calculations, some assumptions are made about the
   experiment:
       That the specific heat capacity of the solution is the same as pure water, i.e. 4.18 J g-
       1 K-1

       That the density of the solution is the same as pure water, i.e. 1 g cm-3
       The specific heat capacity of the container is ignored
       The reaction is complete
       There are negligible heat losses




  Examiner Tips and Tricks
  As well as any assumptions made for the experiment, you can be expected to
  comment on:
       Sources of error, e.g. incorrect masses or volumes of chemicals, heat loss to the
       surroundings, etc.
       Uncertainty, e.g. measurements for mass, volume and temperature




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com    11
           Be aware that you will have to double the uncertainty reading for temperature
           as the calculation requires an initial and final temperature to determine the
           temperature change                                                                   Your notes

Temperature correction graphs
    For reactions which are not instantaneous there may be a delay before the maximum
    temperature is reached
    During that delay the substances themselves may be losing heat to the surroundings, so
    that the true maximum temperature is never actually reached
    To overcome this problem we can use graphical analysis to determine the maximum
    enthalpy change




  A temperature correction graph for a metal displacement reaction between zinc and
              copper sulfate solution. The zinc is added after 4 minutes
The steps to make a temperature correction graph are:
 1. Take a temperature reading before adding the reactants for a few minutes to get a
    steady value
 2. Add the second reactant and continue recording the temperature and time
 3. Plot the graph and extrapolate the cooling part of the graph until you intersect the time
    at which the second reactant was added

Analysis
    Use both extrapolated lines to calculate ΔT as shown on the graph
    Use the equation q = mcΔT to calculate the energy transferred
        q = energy transferred


                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   12
     m = mass - this will be the mass of the 25 cm3 solution which will be 25 g (assuming a
     density of 1 g cm-3)
                                                                                                Your notes
     c = specific heat capacity - this will be assumed to be 4.18 J g-1 K-1, which is the
     specific heat capacity of water
   ΔT = the temperature change from the graph
Convert your value for energy transferred from J into kJ

                               q
Then use the equation ΔH =       to calculate the enthalpy change for the reaction
                               n
     q = energy transferred
     n = number of moles - this would be the number of moles of the limiting reagent,
     which means that you will have an extra calculation to do to determine whether this is
     the zinc or the copper sulfate
Remember that in the example above, the temperature of the reaction mixture
increased which means that the reaction is exothermic and should, therefore, have a
negative value




Worked Example
Enthalpy of neutralisation calculation
The initial temperature of 25.0 cm3 of sodium hydroxide and 50.0 cm3 of sulfuric acid
was measured every 30 seconds for 3 minutes. The two liquids were then mixed and
the temperature of the resulting solution was taken every 30 seconds for 5 minutes. A
temperature correction graph of the results was plotted and the temperature change
was determined to be 6.5 oC.
Calculate the energy transferred during this reaction.
Answer
    q = m x c x ΔT
         m (of resulting solution) = 25.0 + 50.0 = 75.0 g
         c (of water) = 4.18 J g-1 oC-1
         ΔT (of water) = 6.5 oC
         q = 75.0 x 4.18 x 6.5 = 2038 J




Examiner Tips and Tricks
It is more likely that you would be asked to calculate the enthalpy change for this
neutralisation reaction
  1. Calculate the number of moles of NaOH and H2SO4 to determine which reactant
     is the limiting reagent



                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   13
     2. Calculate the enthalpy change by dividing the energy transferred by the number
        of moles of the limiting reagent
  Another twist to this calculation could be for the NaOH and H2SO4 to have different         Your notes
  initial temperatures
      In this case, you work out the energy transferred for the NaOH and for the H2SO4
      separately and then add them together
      After that you follow steps 1 and 2 above to calculate the enthalpy change

Enthalpy of combustion
  The principle here is to use the heat released by a combustion reaction to increase the
  heat content of water
  A typical simple calorimeter is used to measure the temperature changes to the water




                           A simple combustion calorimeter
  To complete this experiment, the following steps will need to be completed:




                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   14
                                                                Your notes




© 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.   Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   15
                                                                                                 Your notes

  It is important that you record the starting temperature, and the final temperature in
  order to complete the calculations
  You must also record the starting mass of the spirit burner and the final mass of the spirit
  burner, so that you can work out the mass of the fuel burned during the reaction
       This will then be used to calculate the moles, which will be used to convert Q to an
       enthalpy change in your calculations

Key points to consider
  Not all the heat produced by the combustion reaction is transferred to the water
       Some heat is lost to the surroundings
       Some heat is absorbed by the calorimeter
  To minimise the heat losses the copper calorimeter should not be placed too far above
  the flame and a lid placed over the calorimeter
  Shielding can be used to reduce draughts
  In this experiment the main sources of error are
       Heat losses
       Incomplete combustion




  Worked Example
  Enthalpy of combustion
  In a calorimetry experiment 2.50 g of methane is burnt in excess oxygen.
  30% of the energy released during the combustion is absorbed by 500 g of water,
  the temperature of which rises from 25 °C to 68 °C.
  The specific heat capacity of water is 4.18 J g-1 K−1
  What is the total energy released per gram of methane burnt?
   Answer
   Step 1:
      q = m x c x ΔT
             m (of water) = 500 g
             c (of water) = 4.18 J g-1 oC-1
             ΔT (of water) = 68 oC - 25 oC = 43 oC
   Step 2:



                              © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   16
     q = 500 x 4.18 x 43 = 89 870 J
  Step 3:
                                                                                             Your notes
     This is only 30% of the total energy released by methane
         Total energy x 0.3 = 89 870 J
         Total energy = 299 567 J
  Step 4:
     This is released by 2.50 g of methane
          Energy released by 1.00 g of methane = 299 567 ÷ 2.50 = 120 000 J g-1 (to 3
          s.f.) or 120 kJ g-1


Calculating Enthalpy Changes
 Aqueous solutions of acid, alkalis and salts are assumed to be largely water so you can
 just use the m and c values of water when calculating the energy transferred.
 To calculate any changes in enthalpy per mole of a reactant or product the following
 relationship can be used:

                                       q    m × c × ΔT
                              ΔH =       or
                                       n        n
 When there is a rise in temperature, the value for ΔH becomes negative suggesting that
 the reaction is exothermic
     This means that your value should be negative for an exothermic reaction, e.g.
     combustion
 When the temperature falls, the value for ΔH becomes positive suggesting that the
 reaction is endothermic
     This means that your value should be positive for an endothermic reaction, e.g.
     ammonium salts dissolving in water




 Worked Example
 1.50 g of an organic liquid (Mr = 58.0) underwent complete combustion. The heat
 formed raised the temperature of 100 g of water from 20 oC to 75 oC.
 Calculate the enthalpy of combustion for the organic liquid
 Answer
 Step 1: Calculate the energy released by the organic liquid
     Q = mcΔT
          Q = 100 x 4.18 x (75 - 20)
          Q = 22990 J
          Q = 22.99 kJ


                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   17
Step 2: Calculate the number of moles of the organic liquid

                              mass       1 . 50                                             Your notes
    Number of moles =     = molar mass = 58. 0 = 0.0259 moles (to 3s.f.)
Step 3: Calculate the enthalpy change of combustion

               Q    22. 99
    Δc H θ   = n = 0 . 0259 = -887 kJ mol-1 (to 3s.f.)
         Remember, combustion is an exothermic process and will, therefore, be a
         negative enthalpy change value




                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   18
  Using Hess Cycles
                                                                                                  Your notes

Hess Cycles - Construction
    In 1840, the Russian chemist Germain Hess formulated a law which went on to be known
    as Hess’s Law
    This went on to form the basis of one of the laws of thermodynamics. The first law of
    thermodynamics relates to the Law of Conservation of Energy
    It is sometimes expressed in the following form:
Energy cannot be created or destroyed, it can only change form
    This means that in a closed system, the total amount of energy present is always
    constant
    Hess’s law can be used to calculate the standard enthalpy change of a reaction from
    known standard enthalpy changes
    Hess’s Law states that:
"The total enthalpy change in a chemical reaction is independent of the route by which the
chemical reaction takes place as long as the initial and final conditions are the same."
    This means that whether the reaction takes place in one or two steps, the total enthalpy
    change of the reaction will still be the same




 According to Hess’ Law, the enthalpy change of the direct route, going from reactants
      (A+B) to product (C), is equal to the enthalpy change of the indirect routes
    Hess’ Law is used to calculate enthalpy changes which can’t be found experimentally
    using calorimetry, e.g.:
                                  3C (s) + 4H2 (g) → C3H8(g)



                              © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   19
   ΔfH (propane) can’t be found experimentally as hydrogen and carbon don’t react under
   standard conditions
                                                                                                Your notes
Calculating ΔHr from ΔHf using Hess’s Law energy cycles
   You can see the relationships on the following diagram:




 The enthalpy change from elements to products (direct route) is equal to the enthalpy
       change of elements forming reactants and then products (indirect route)
   The products can be formed:
       Directly from the elements = ΔH2
       OR
       Indirectly from the elements = ΔH1 + ΔHr
   Equation
                                        ΔH2 = ΔH1 + ΔHr

   Therefore for energy to be conserved,
                                        ΔHr = ΔH2 – ΔH1




  Examiner Tips and Tricks
  You do not need to learn Hess's Law word for word as it is not a syllabus requirement,
  but you do need to understand the principle as it provides the foundation for all the
  problem solving in Chemical Energetics


Hess Cycles - Calculations
Calculating ΔHr from ΔHf using Hess’s Law energy
cycles
   Knowing the enthalpy change of formation, ΔHf, allows us to determine the overall
   enthalpy change of a reaction, ΔHr
   To do this, we follow these steps:




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   20
  1. Write the equation for the reaction
  2. Write the elements with the correct number of moles and state symbols                    Your notes
     underneath
  3. Draw upwards pointing arrows to each compound
  4. Write the appropriate values on the arrows and multiply by the number of moles
  5. In a cycle, go from the reactants to the products, changing the sign of the value if
     the arrow points in the opposite direction




Worked Example
Calculating the enthalpy change of reaction
Use the information in the table to calculate the enthalpy change for this reaction:
                 NH4NO3 (s) + ½C (s) → N2 (g) + 2H2O (g) + ½CO2 (g)

     Substance           C (s)     N2 (g)     H2O(g)     CO2 (g)       NH4NO3 (s)

    ∆Hfө / kJ mol–1        0         0         –242         –394             –365

Answer:
Step 1: Write the balanced equation




Step 2: Write the elements with the correct number of moles and state symbols
underneath




Step 3: Draw upwards pointing arrows to each compound




                         © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   21
                                                                                             Your notes




Step 4: Write the appropriate values on the arrows and multiply by the number of
moles




Step 5: In a cycle, go from the reactants to the products, changing the sign of the
value if the arrow points in the opposite direction




ΔHrө = +365 - 484 - 197 = -316 kJ mol-1

    The sign on -365 needs reversing as the cycle goes in the opposite direction to
    the arrow pointing upwards
    There is no need to draw arrows from the elements to carbon and nitrogen as ΔHfө
    is 0 for elements




Examiner Tips and Tricks




                         © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   22
  Keep your enthalpy values inside their own brackets so that you don't accidentally
  lose a minus sign
                                                                                                Your notes
Calculating ΔHf from ΔHc using Hess’s Law energy
cycles
  It can be difficult to find the enthalpy change of formation of compounds experimentally
  However, many enthalpy changes of combustion can be measured experimentally so
  these can be used to find the enthalpy of formation
  To do this, we follow these steps:
    1. Write the equation for the formation of the compound
    2. Write the combustion products below the equation
    3. Draw downward pointing arrows from each substance to its combustion products
    4. Write values on the arrows and multiply by the number of moles
    5. In a cycle, go from the reactants to the products, changing the sign of the value if
       the arrow points in the opposite direction




  Worked Example
  Calculating the enthalpy change of formation
  Using the data provided, calculate the standard enthalpy change of formation, ΔHf, of
  propanone.
                   3C (s) + 3H2 (g) + ½ O2 (g)      → CH3COCH3 (l)
            Substance                  C (s)       H2 (g)           CH3COCH3 (l)

         ∆HCө / kJ mol–1               -394        -286                  -1821

  Answer:
      Step 1: Write the balanced equation




      Step 2:Write the combustion products below the equation




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   23
                                                                                            Your notes




    Step 3: Draw downward pointing arrows from each substance to its combustion
    product




    Step 4: Write the appropriate values on the arrows and multiply by the number of
    moles




    Step 5: In a cycle, go from the reactants to the products, changing the sign of the
    value if the arrow points in the opposite direction




ΔHfө = -1182 - 858 + 1821 = -219 kJ mol-1




                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   24
    The sign on -1821 needs reversing as the cycle goes in the opposite direction to
    the arrow pointing to the combustion products
                                                                                            Your notes



Examiner Tips and Tricks
Don't forget to make sure the number of atoms for each element is balanced when
drawing your cycle.




                        © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   25
 Bond Enthalpies
                                                                                              Your notes

Bond Enthalpy - Definitions
   When bonds are broken or made enthalpy changes take place
       A chemical bond is a force of attraction between two atoms
       Breaking the bond requires the input of energy it is therefore an endothermic
       process
   The energy change required to break the bond depends on the atoms that form the
   bond
       The energy required to break a particular bond is called the bond dissociation
       enthalpy
       This is usually just shortened to bond enthalpy or bond energy
   Bond formation is the opposite of bond breaking and so energy is released when bonds
   are formed
       It is therefore an exothermic process




To break bonds energy is required from the surroundings and to make new bonds energy
                  is released from the reaction to the surroundings




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   26
   The amount of energy released when a particular bond is formed has the same
   magnitude as the energy taken in when the bond is broken but has the opposite sign
                                                                                             Your notes
Overall enthalpy changes
   If more energy is released when new bonds are formed than energy is required to break
   bonds, the reaction is exothermic
       The products are more stable than the reactants
   If more energy is required to break bonds than energy is released when new bonds are
   formed, the reaction is endothermic
       The products are less stable than the reactants
   The relationship between bond breaking and bond making can be shown graphically like
   this:




                                 Bond enthalpy profiles
Average bond energy
   Bond energies are affected by other atoms in the molecule (the environment)
   Therefore, an average of a number of the same type of bond but in different
   environments is calculated
   This bond energy is known as the average bond energy and is defined as
'The energy needed to break one mole of bonds in a gaseous molecule averaged over
similar compounds'




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   27
                                                                                            Your notes




                    Average bond enthalpy of C-H in methane
The average bond enthalpy of C-H is found by taking the bond dissociation enthalpy
for the whole molecule and dividing it by the number of C-H bonds
The first C-H bond is easier to break than the second as the remaining hydrogens are
pulled more closely to the carbon
However, since it is impossible to measure the energy of each C-H bond an average is
taken
This value is also compared with a range of similar compounds to obtain an accepted
value for the average bond enthalpy
Bond enthalpies can be used to predict which bonds will break first in a reaction
    Bonds with high bond enthalpy values require more energy to break them
        Reactions involving these types of bond often require heat and / or the use of a
        catalyst
    Bonds with low bond enthalpy values require less energy to break them
        Reactions involving these types of bonds are more likely to happen at room
        temperature
    Therefore, bonds with lower bond enthalpy values are easier to break and are likely
    to be the first bonds to break in a reaction




Examiner Tips and Tricks



                        © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   28
 A lot of students mix up endothermic / exothermic and bond breaking / bond making.
 An easy way to remember is that ENDOTHERMIC leads to the poetic phrase the 'end               Your notes
 o' the bond'


Bond Enthalpy - Calculations
 Bond energies are used to find the ΔHrꝋ of a reaction when this cannot be done
 experimentally
 The process is a step-by-step summation of the bond enthalpies of the all the
 molecules present finishing with this formula:
    ΔrHꝋ = enthalpy change for bonds broken + enthalpy change for bonds formed

 These two worked examples show how to lay out your calculation




 Worked Example
 Calculate the enthalpy of reaction for the Haber process reaction. The relevant bond
 energies are given in the table below:




 Answer:
 Step 1: The chemical equation for the Haber process is:
                              N2 (g) + 3H2 (g) ⇌ 2NH3 (g)
                                N≡N 3 H-H        6 N-H
 Step 2: Set out the calculation as a balance sheet as shown below:




                         © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   29
                                                                                            Your notes




Note! Values for bonds broken are positive (endothermic) and values for bonds
formed are negative (exothermic)
Step 3: Calculate the standard enthalpy of reaction
    ΔrHꝋ = enthalpy change for bonds broken + enthalpy change for bonds formed

        ΔrHꝋ = (+2253 kJ mol-1) + (-2346 kJ mol-1)
        ΔrHꝋ = -93 kJ mol-1




Worked Example
The complete combustion of ethyne, C2H2 , is shown in the equation below:
                     2C2H2 (g) + 5 O2 (g) → 2H2O (g) + 4CO2 (g)
Using the average bond enthalpies given in the table, what is the enthalpy of
combustion of ethyne?




Answer:



                         © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   30
Step 1: The enthalpy of combustion is the enthalpy change when one mole of a
substance reacts in excess oxygen to produce water and carbon dioxide
                                                                                           Your notes
The chemical reaction should be therefore simplified such that only one mole of
ethyne reacts in excess oxygen:
                     H-C≡C-H + 2 ½ O=O → H-O-H + 2O=C=O
Step 2: Set out the calculation as a balance sheet as shown below:




    ΔrHꝋ = enthalpy change for bonds broken + enthalpy change for bonds formed

        ΔrHꝋ = (+2912 kJ mol-1) + (- 4142 kJ mol-1)
        ΔrHꝋ = -1230 kJ mol-1




Examiner Tips and Tricks
The key to success in bond enthalpy calculations is to be very careful when
accounting for every bond present. Always draw out the full displayed structures of
the molecules so you don't miss any of the bonds.
Watch out for coefficients in the balanced equations as students often miss those,
forget to multiply them by the bond enthalpies and get the answer wrong!
It is super important to show your steps because bond enthalpy calculations often
carry 3 marks, 2 of which could be for workings if you get the final answer wrong




                         © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.     Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   31
