  Edexcel International AS                                                          Your notes
Chemistry
Organic Chemistry: Introduction
Contents
  Types of Reaction
  Reaction Mechanisms: Introduction




                     © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.   Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   1
 Types of Reaction
                                                                                                Your notes

Types of Reaction
  Reactions can be classified as:
      Addition
      Elimination
      Substitution
      Oxidation
      Reduction
      Hydrolysis
      Polymerisation

Addition reactions
  These involve two reactants combining to form one product
  The most common example of an addition reaction involves alkenes, e.g.
                                     C 2 H 4 + H 2 → C2 H 6
                                    C2H4 + Br2 → C2H4Br2
                                 C2H4 + H2O → C2H5OH

Elimination reactions
  These are usually identified by one or two reactants forming more products
      The products often include an alkene and a smaller molecule that has been
      eliminated from the reactant, e.g.
                                                +
                        CH3CH2Br + OH-      ⎯⎯⎯
                                             H
                                                  C2H4 + H2O + Br–

Substitution reactions
  An atom or group of atoms in a compounds is replaced by another atom or group of
  atoms, e.g.
                           CH3CH2Br + OH- → C2H5OH + Br–

Oxidation reactions
  This can involve the loss of hydrogen or the gain of oxygen
  A reactant is oxidised by another chemical species, usually an inorganic reagent, e.g.
                              CH3CHO + [O] → CH3COOH




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   2
   In this example, the oxidising agent [O] could be acidified potassium dichromate(VI)
   solution, Fehling's solution or Tollens' reagent
                                                                                                Your notes
Reduction reactions
   This can involve the gain of hydrogen or the loss of oxygen
   A reactant is reduced by another chemical species
       This can often be completed using a catalyst and a small reactant molecule such as
       H2 or HCl, e.g.
                               CH3CHO + [H] → CH3CH2OH
   In this example, the oxidising agent [H] could be lithium aluminium hydride

Hydrolysis reactions
   The name can be misleading as hydrolysis suggests that water is being used to split (or
   lyse) a compound
   Hydrolysis reactions are a specific reaction with water, e.g.
                               CH3Cl + H2O → CH3OH + HCl

Polymerisation reactions
   At AS level, you should know about addition polymerisation
   This is where the carbon-carbon double bond of an alkene monomer breaks open and
   forms a polymer chain, e.g.




Addition polymerisation of one alkene monomer is polymerised, a (poly)alkene is formed



                             © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   3
Reaction Mechanisms: Introduction
                                                                                                 Your notes

Reaction Mechanisms - Introduction
  Reaction equations tell you about the amount of reactants and products, including their
  stoichiometry, in a reaction
  Reaction mechanisms tell you about how the reaction actually takes place
  In a reaction mechanism, curly arrows show the movement of electrons
      Curly arrows can be single headed, sometimes called fish-hook arrows or half curly
      arrows, to show the movement of one electron which can occur when:
           A covalent bond undergoes homolytic fission to form two radicals
           Two radicals terminate forming a covalent bond in the process
           A radical and a covalent compound propagate as part of a reaction, as shown:




   During this propagation step, the unpaired electron from chlorine and one of the
electrons from the C-H bond react together to form a new covalent bond and the other
              electron from the C-H bond moves to form a methyl radical



  Examiner Tips and Tricks
  The use of single headed arrows is not required knowledge Their main use is in free
  radical reactions which are usually represented using written equations rather than
  outlined mechanisms

  Curly arrows can be double headed to show the movement of a pair of electrons, which
  can occur when:
      A covalent bond undergoes fission to form a positive and a negative ion
      The positive ion is electron deficient and is an electrophile
      The negative ion is electron rich and is a nucleophile
      A lone pair of electrons attacks a positive or δ+ centre and forms a new covalent
      bond, as shown:



                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   4
                                                                                                   Your notes




During this step of an addition reaction, the lone pair from the bromide ion reacts with the
                     positive carbocation to form a new covalent bond
   Curly arrows are a feature of three main types of reaction:
     1. Addition reactions - where two reactants combine to form one product, e.g. ethene
        and bromine undergoing addition to form 1,2-dibromoethane
     2. Substitution reactions - where an atom or group of atoms in a compounds is
        replaced by another atom or group of atoms, e.g. bromoethane reacting with the
        hydroxide ion to form ethanol and the bromide ion
     3. Elimination reactions - where a small molecule is removed from a larger molecule,
        e.g. ethanol reacting with an acid catalyst to form ethene alongside a small
        molecule of water which is eliminated

Bond Polarity & Mechanisms
   Bond polarity can be used to suggest reaction mechanisms
                                  C2H6 + Cl2 → C2H5Cl + HCl
   A hydrogen atom in ethane is substituted by a chlorine atom
        All of the bonds in the reaction of ethane with chlorine are either non-polar or only
        slightly polar
        This suggests that the type of bond breaking will be homolytic fission
        The reaction is likely to involve free radicals
        Therefore, the reaction mechanism is likely to be free radical substitution
                                     C2H4 + HBr → C2H5Br
   The hydrogen bromide is added to the ethene molecule
        The hydrogen bromide molecule contains a polar bond
        This suggests that the type of bond breaking will be heterolytic fission
        The reaction could involve electrophiles or nucleophiles
        The ethene molecule contains a carbon-carbon double bond which will attract an
        electrophile
        Therefore, the reaction mechanism is most likely to be electrophilic addition



                               © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   5
