  Edexcel International AS                                                            Your notes
Chemistry
Redox Chemistry & Acid-Base
Titrations
Contents
  Oxidation Numbers - Introduction
  Oxidation & Reduction
  Disproportionation Reactions
  Ionic Equations
  Acid-Base Titrations with Indicators




                       © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.   Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   1
 Oxidation Numbers - Introduction
                                                                                              Your notes

Oxidation Numbers - Introduction
  There are three definitions of oxidation and reduction used in different branches of
  chemistry
  Oxidation and reduction can be used to describe any of the following processes

Definitions and Examples of Oxidation & Reduction




   Use the acronym "Oil Rig" to help you remember the definitions of oxidation and
                                      reduction
Oxidation Number
  The oxidation number of an atom is the charge that would exist on an individual atom if
  the bonding were completely ionic
  It is like the electronic ‘status’ of an element
  Oxidation numbers are used to
      Tell if oxidation or reduction has taken place
      Work out what has been oxidised and/or reduced



                              © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.    Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   2
         Construct half equations and balance redox equations
Oxidation Numbers of Simple Ions                                                                  Your notes




  Worked Example
  What are the oxidation numbers of the elements in the following species?
  a) C        b) Fe3+         c) Fe2+
  d) O2-       e) He           f) Al3+
  Answers:
  a) 0 b) +3 c) +2
  d) -2 e) 0 f) +3


         So, in simple ions, the oxidation numbers of the atom is the charge on the ion:
             Na+, K+, H+ all have an oxidation number of +1
             Mg2+, Ca2+, Pb2+ all have an oxidation number of +2
             Cl–, Br–, I– all have an oxidation number of -1
             O2-, S2- all have an oxidation number of -2

Oxidation Number Rules
  A few simple rules help guide you through the process of determining the oxidation
  number of any element
  Remember, you are determining the oxidation number of a single atom
  The oxidation number (ox.no.) refers to a single atom in a compound

Oxidation Number Rules Table




                               © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   3
                                                                                              Your notes




Roman Numerals
  Transition metals are characterised by having variable oxidation numbers.
  Oxidation numbers can be used in the names of compounds to indicate which
  oxidation number a particular element in the compound is in
  Where the element has a variable oxidation number, the number is written afterwards in
  Roman numerals.
  This is called the STOCK NOTATION (after the German inorganic chemist Alfred Stock),
  but is not as widely used for non-metals, so SO2 is often referred to as sulfur dioxide
  rather than sulfur(IV) oxide
  For example, iron can be both +2 and +3 so Roman numerals are used to distinguish
  between them




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   4
      Fe2+ in FeO can be written as iron(II) oxide
     Fe3+ in Fe2O3 can be written as iron(III) oxide                                              Your notes
  More complicated examples include other atoms / ions as part of the formula
      Potassium manganate(VII) implies that the manganese is in a +7 oxidation
      Potassium manganate(VII) contains the potassium ion K+ and the manganate ion
      MnO4–
           Since the oxygen in the manganate ion is in the -2 oxidation state, there is a total
           of -8 from the oxygen
           The manganate ion has an overall -1 charge, which means that the manganese
           ion must be in the +7 oxidation state

Oxidation Numbers - Calculations
Molecules or Compounds
  In molecules or compounds, the sum of the oxidation numbers on the atoms is zero

Oxidation Number in Molecules or Compounds Table




  Because CO2 is a neutral molecule, the sum of the oxidation states must be zero
  For this, one element must have a positive oxidation number and the other must be
  negative

How do you determine which is the positive one?
  The more electronegative species will have the negative value
  Electronegativity increases across a period and decreases down a group
  O is further to the right than C in the periodic table so it has the negative value

How do you determine the value of an element's oxidation
number?
  From its position in the periodic table and / or the other element(s) present in the formula

Hydrogen in metal hydrides, H-
  An example of a metal hydride is sodium hydrogen, NaH which is a neutral compound
  The hydrogen atom is present as a hydride ion



                             © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   5
     This has the symbol H- and therefore the oxidation state -1
  We can also think of this as a sum
                                                                                                Your notes
       Since group 1 metals always have an oxidation state of +1 in their compounds, it
       follows that the hydrogen must have an oxidation state of -1 (+1 -1 = 0)
Oxygen in peroxides, O-
  Peroxides include hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, which again is a neutral compound
  The sum of the oxidation states of the hydrogen and oxygen must be 0
  Since each hydrogen has an oxidation state of +1, each oxygen must have an oxidation
  state of -1 to accommodate the neutral charge of the compound

Ions
  The oxidation number of elements within an ion can be calculated using the rules shown
  in the Oxidation Number Rules Table (above)




  Worked Example
  Deduce the oxidation number of the highlighted element in:
   1. The nitrite ion: NO2–
   2. The nitrate ion: NO3–
   3. The thiosulfate ion: S2O32–
   4. The tetrathionate ion: S4O62–
  Answers
     In all of the answers, the O is more electronegative than the other element, so the
     oxidation number of O will be –2
  Answer 1:
       The nitrite ion contains two oxygen atoms
           2 x –2 = –4
           The overall ion has an oxidation state of –1, which means that the oxidation
           numbers of the elements in the ion must add up to –1
           Therefore, the oxidation number of N is +3
               N + (2 x –2) = –1 N = +3
  Answer 2:
       The nitrate ion contains three oxygen atoms
           3 x –2 = –6
           The overall ion has an oxidation state of –1, which means that the oxidation
           numbers of the elements in the ion must add up to –1
           Therefore, the oxidation number of N is +5
               N + (3 x –2) = –1 N = +5
  Answer 3:




                              © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   6
   The thiosulfate ion contains three oxygen atoms
       3 x –2 = –6                                                                         Your notes
       The overall ion has an oxidation state of –2, which means that the oxidation
       numbers of the elements in the ion must add up to –2
       The oxidation number of both S atoms is +4
           2S + (3 x –2) = –2 2S = +4
       Therefore, the oxidation number of S is +2
            2S = +4
            S = +2
Answer 4:
   The tetrathionate ion contains six oxygen atoms
       6 x –2 = –12
       The overall ion has an oxidation state of –2, which means that the oxidation
       numbers of the elements in the ion must add up to –2
       The oxidation number of all four S atoms is +10
           4S + (6 x –2) = –2 4S = +10
       Therefore, the oxidation number of S is +2.5
            4S = +10
            S = 2.5
       This specific question is a rare example showing a fractional oxidation
       number for the element in question / sulfur
            This is because the sulfur atoms are in two different environments




            The fractional oxidation number shows the average oxidation number of
            the sulfur environments




                         © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   7
 Oxidation & Reduction
                                                                                               Your notes

Electron Transfer & Oxidation Numbers
  Oxidation and reduction in a reaction can be demonstrated in terms of electron transfer
      For example:
                                2NH3 + 3Br2 → N2 + 6HBr
  The oxidation number of N in NH3 has changed from -3 to 0
      As the oxidation number has increased, nitrogen has been oxidised
  The oxidation number of Br has changed from 0 to -1
      As the oxidation number has decreased, bromine has been reduced
  Overall, nitrogen has reduced bromine by donating electrons

Reducing & Oxidising Agents
Oxidising agent
  An oxidising agent is a substance that oxidises another atom or ion by causing it to lose
  electrons
  An oxidising agent itself gets reduced – gains electrons
  Therefore, the ox. no. of the oxidising agent decreases




                 Example of an oxidising agent in a chemical reaction
Reducing agent
  A reducing agent is a substance that reduces another atom or ion by causing it to gain
  electrons
  A reducing agent itself gets oxidised – loses / donates electrons
  Therefore, the ox. no. of the reducing agent increases




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   8
                                                                                              Your notes




                 Example of a reducing agent in a chemical reaction
For a reaction to be recognised as a redox reaction, there must be both an oxidising and
reducing agent
Some substances can act both as oxidising and reducing agents
Their nature is dependent upon what they are reacting with and the reaction conditions




Worked Example
Four reactions are shown.
In which reaction is the species in bold acting as an oxidising agent?
 1. Cr2O72- + 8H+ + 3SO32- → 2Cr3+ + 4H2O + 3SO42-
 2. Mg + Fe2+ → Mg2+ + Fe
 3. Cl2 + 2Br- → 2Cl- + Br2
 4. Fe2O3 + 3CO → 2Fe + 3CO2
Answer:
    The correct option is 2
        Oxidising agents are substances that oxidise other species, gain electrons
        and are themselves reduced.
        Write down the oxidation numbers of each species in the reaction




    In equation 2, Fe2+ oxidises Mg(0) to Mg2+(+2) and is itself reduced from Fe2+(+2)
    to Fe(0)




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   9
 Disproportionation Reactions
                                                                                              Your notes

Disproportionation
Disproportionation reactions
   A disproportionation reaction is a reaction in which the same species is simultaneously
   oxidised and reduced




Example of a disproportion reaction in which the same species (chlorine in this case) has
                           been both oxidised and reduced



  Worked Example
  Balancing disproportionation reactions
  Balance the disproportionation reaction which takes place when chlorine is added to
  hot concentrated aqueous sodium hydroxideThe products are Cl- and ClO3- ions and
  water
  Answer
  Step 1: Write the unbalanced equation and identify the atoms that change in
  oxidation number:




  Step 2: Deduce the oxidation number changes:




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.      Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   10
                                                                                       Your notes




Step 3: Balance the oxidation number changes:




Step 4: Balance the charges




Step 5: Balance the atoms




                       © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.   Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   11
Ionic Equations
                                                                                                Your notes

Chemical Formulae & Oxidation
Numbers
 Oxidation numbers are a useful tool for naming compounds as some elements can exist
 with more than one oxidation number
 For compound with two elements it is straight forward to name the compound
 For example
      PCl3 is phosphorus(III) chloride or phosphorus trichloride
      PCl5 is phosphorus(V) chloride or phosphorus pentachloride
      OF2 is oxygen difluoride
      O2F2 is dioxygen difluoride
 In order to name a more complete compound we use Roman numerals for the element
 that has a variable oxidation number
      K2CrO4 potassium chromate(VI)




 Worked Example
 Can you name these transition metal compounds?
  1. Cu2O
  2. MnSO4
  3. Na2CrO4
  4. KMnO4
  5. Na2Cr2O7
 Answer:
 Answer 1: copper(I) oxide:
 The ox. no. of 1 O atom is -2 and Cu2O has overall no charge so the ox. no. of Cu is +1
 Answer 2: manganese(II) sulfate:
 The charge on the sulfate ion is -2, so the charge on Mn and ox. no. is +2
 Answer 3: sodium chromate(VI):
 The ox. no. of 2 Na atoms is +2 so CrO4 has an overall -2 charge, so the ox. no. of Cr is
 +6
 Answer 4: potassium manganate(VII):
 The ox. no. of a K atom is +1 so MnO4 has overall -1 charge, so the ox. no. of Mn is +7



                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   12
  Answer 5: sodium dichromate(VI):
  The ox. no. of 2 Na atoms is +2 so Cr2O7 has an overall -2 charge, so the ox. no. of Cr is     Your notes
  +6. To distinguish it from CrO4 we use the prefix di in front of the anion


Forming Anions & Cations
Metals
  Metals, in general, will form positive ions by losing electrons
  Therefore, they are oxidised and the oxidation number increases
  Example 1:
       When sodium reacts with water, sodium hydroxide and hydrogen gas is formed
                          2Na (s) + H2O (l) → 2NaOH (aq) + H2 (g)
  The oxidation number of sodium changes from 0 to +1
  Example 2:
       When magnesium reacts with hydrochloric acid, magnesium chloride and hydrogen
       gas is formed
                          Mg (s) + 2HCl (l) → MgCl2 (aq) + H2 (g)
  The oxidation number of magnesium changed from 0 to +2

Non-metals
  Non-metals, in general, will form negative ions by gaining electrons
  Therefore, they are reduced and the oxidation number decreases
  Example:
       When sodium reacts with oxygen, sodium oxide is formed
                                4Na (s) + O2 (g) → Na2O (s)
  The oxidation number of oxygen changes from 0 to -2

Constructing Ionic Equations
Half Equations and Ionic Equations
  Half equations and ionic equations are specific types of equations for showing some of
  the fine details going on in chemical reactions
  Half equations are used to show what happens to the electrons in reactions where
  atoms, molecules or ions are gaining or losing electrons
  They are called half equations, because they represent only half of what is happening in a
  reaction involving electron transfer




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   13
     One species gains electrons
   Another species loses electrons                                                             Your notes
Examples of half equations are:
                                Pb2+ + 2e- → Pb
                                    2Br- → Br2 + 2e-
Some half equations are more complicated and require the addition of water and
hydrogen ions in addition to electrons
The steps required to balance a half equation are:
     Step 1: Write the unbalanced equation to show the species that undergoes
     reduction or oxidation, if necessary, balance the atom that is being reduced or
     oxidised
     Step 2: Add H2O to balance O atoms
     Step 3: Add H+ to balance H atoms
     Step 4: Add e- to balance the charge
Half equations can be combined to form an ionic equation
An ionic equation shows what happens in terms of ions in a chemical reaction
This is best shown with an example:




Worked Example
Dichromate ions, Cr2O72- ions react with iron(II) ions, Fe2+, in acidic conditions,
forming chromium(III) ions, Cr3+, and iron(III) ions, Fe3+. Write the half equations and
use these to construct an ionic equation for this reaction.
Answer:
    Fe2+ ions are being oxidised as they gain an electron to form Fe3+, this half
    equation can be simply constructed showing the loss of an electron:
        Fe2+ → Fe3+ + e-
    The reduction of Cr2O72- ions to Cr3+ is not as straightforward, so use the steps
    above to construct the half equation:
         Step 1: Write the unbalanced equation to show the species that undergoes
         reduction or oxidation, if necessary, balance the atom that is being reduced
         or oxidised:
            Cr2O72- → 2Cr3+
         Step 2: Add H2O to balance O atoms
            Cr2O72- → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O
         Step 3: Add H+ to balance H atoms
             Cr2O72- + 14H+ → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O



                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   14
           Step 4: Add e- to balance the charge
              Cr2O72- + 14H+ + 6e- → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O                                               Your notes
      To construct the full ionic equation, combine the two half equations
           To do this, the number of electrons in each half equation needs to be the
           same so that they cancel out when the equations are combined, and so that
           electrons do not appear in the ionic equation
           In this example, multiply the first half equation by 6:
              6Fe2+ → 6Fe3+ + 6e-
              Cr2O72- + 14H+ + 6e- → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O
           Now add all of the reactants and products together - the electrons will
           cancel to give the full ionic equation:
               6Fe2+ + Cr2O72- + 14H+ → 6Fe3+ + 2Cr3+ + 7H2O

Balancing full ionic equations
  You do not have to construct the half equations to be able to write a full ionic equation,
  you can use oxidation numbers to balance them
  This is not as straightforward as just balancing the atoms involved
  Balancing equations using redox principles is a useful skill and is best illustrated by
  following an example
  It is important to follow a methodical step-by-step approach so that you don't get lost:




  Worked Example
  Writing overall redox reactions
  Manganate(VII) ions (MnO4- ) react with Fe2+ ions in the presence of acid (H+) to form
  Mn2+ ions, Fe3+ ions and water
  Write the overall redox equation for this reaction
  Answer
  Step 1: Write the unbalanced equation and identify the atoms which change in
  oxidation number




  Step 2: Deduce the oxidation number changes




                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.       Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   15
                                                                                         Your notes




Step 3: Balance the oxidation number changes




Step 4: Balance the charges




Step 5: Finally, balance the atoms




                         © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.   Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   16
 Acid-Base Titrations with Indicators
                                                                                                Your notes

Acid-Base Titrations with Indicators
  Acid-base titrations are used to find the unknown concentrations of solutions of acids
  and bases
  Acid-base indicators give information about the change in chemical environment
  They change colour reversibly depending on the concentration of H+ ions in the solution
  Indicators are weak acids and bases where the conjugate bases and acids have a
  different colour
  Many acid-base indicators are derived from plants, such as litmus

Common Indicators Table




  A good indicator gives a very sharp colour change at the equivalence point
  In titrations is it not always possible to use two colour indicators because of this
  limitation, so for example litmus cannot be used successfully in a titration
  When phenolphthalein is used, it is usually better to have the base in the burette
  because it is easier to see the sudden and permanent appearance of a colour (pink in
  this case) than the change from a coloured solution to a colourless one

Volumes & concentrations of solutions
  The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute dissolved in a solvent to make 1
  dm3 of solution
      The solute is the substance that dissolves in a solvent to form a solution
      The solvent is often water

                                       number of moles of solute mol       (       )


         Concentration (mol dm3) =
                                          volume of solution dm3      (        )




  A concentrated solution is a solution that has a high concentration of solute




                           © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.        Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   17
A dilute solution is a solution with a low concentration of solute
When carrying out calculations involve concentrations in mol dm-3 the following points          Your notes
need to be considered:
     Change mass in grams to moles
     Change cm3 to dm3
To calculate the mass of a substance present in solution of known concentration and
volume:
     Rearrange the concentration equation
        number of moles (mol) = concentration (mol dm-3) x volume (dm3)
Multiply the moles of solute by its molar mass
         mass of solute (g) = number of moles (mol) x molar mass (g mol-1)




Worked Example
Neutralisation calculation
25.0 cm3 of 0.050 dm-3 sodium carbonate was completely neutralised by 20.00 cm3
of dilute hydrochloric acid.Calculate the concentration in mol dm-3 of the
hydrochloric acid.
Answer
Step 1: Write the balanced symbol equation
                        Na2CO3 + 2HCl → 2NaCl + H2O + CO2
Step 2: Calculate the amount, in moles, of sodium carbonate reacted by rearranging
the equation for amount of substance (mol) and dividing the volume by 1000 to
convert cm3 to dm3
amount (Na2CO3) = 0.025 dm3 x 0.050 mol dm-3 = 0.00125 mol
Step 3: Calculate the moles of hydrochloric acid required using the reaction’s
stoichiometry
1 mol of Na2CO3 reacts with 2 mol of HCl, so the molar ratio is 1 : 2
Therefore 0.00125 moles of Na2CO3 react with 0.00250 moles of HCl
Step 4: Calculate the concentration, in mol dm-3, of hydrochloric acid




                          © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.         Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   18
  concentration (HCl) (mol dm-3) = 0.125 mol dm-3
                                                                                                        Your notes


  Worked Example
  Concentration in g dm-3
  A student dissolved 10 g of sodium hydroxide, NaOH, in 2 dm3 of distilled water.
  Calculate the concentration of the solution.
  Answer:

                                  Mass g
       Concentration     =                (       )




                              Volume dm 3(                )




                                   5 g dm −3
                              10
       Concentration     =     2
                                  =

Uncertainty - Calculations
Percentage Uncertainties
  Percentage uncertainties are a way to compare the significance of an absolute
  uncertainty on a measurement
  This is not to be confused with percentage error, which is a comparison of a result to a
  literature value
  The formula for calculating percentage uncertainty is as follows:

                 percentage uncertainty %     (       )   = total uncertainty
                                                             measured value
                                                                              × 100
Adding or subtracting measurements
  When you are adding or subtracting two measurements then you add together
  the absolute measurement uncertainties
  For example,
      Using a balance to measure the initial and final mass of a container
      Using a thermometer for the measurement of the temperature at the start and the
      end
      Using a burette to find the initial reading and final reading
  In all of these examples, you have to read the instrument twice to obtain the quantity
  If each time you read the instrument the measurement is ‘out’ by the stated uncertainty,
  then your final quantity is potentially ‘out’ by twice the uncertainty

Total experimental uncertainty


                            © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.               Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   19
Some experiments use multiple pieces of equipment, which each have a measure of
uncertainty in their use
                                                                                                 Your notes
For example, a titration against a standard solution will have the following uncertainties:
    Using a balance to measure the mass of the solid used to make the standard
    solution
    Using a volumetric flask to make the standard solution
    Using a volumetric pipette to measure the sample that is being titrated against
    Using a burette to find the initial reading and final reading that determine the titre
    volume
If each piece of equipment used in the experiment has its own associated uncertainty,
you can determine the total experimental uncertainty by adding the total individual
uncertainties

 total experimental percentage uncertainty %      (   )   = Σ individual uncertainties
                                                              (                          )




For example, a titration against a standard solution may have:
    An uncertainty of ±0.5% for the use of the balance
    An uncertainty of ±0.1% for the use of the volumetric flask
    An uncertainty of ±0.2% for the use of the volumetric pipette
    An uncertainty of ±0.4% for the use of the burette
    Therefore, the total experimental uncertainty would be 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 = ±1.2%




                         © 2025 Save My Exams, Ltd.           Get more and ace your exams at savemyexams.com   20
